A Selection of Clinical Scenarios

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

Craig Sims, Dana Weber and Chris Johnson (eds.) A Guide to Pediatric Anesthesia[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4\_31](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4_31)

# 31. A Selection of Clinical Scenarios

Dana Weber[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor1)   and Craig Sims[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor2)  

(1)

Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Perth Children’s Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia

Dana Weber

Email: [dana.weber@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:dana.weber@health.wa.gov.au)

Craig Sims (Corresponding author)

Email: [craig.sims@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:craig.sims@health.wa.gov.au)

### Keywords

Transfusion trigger infantLaparoscopic appendicectomyAnesthesiaConsent for procedures in minorsMuscular dystrophyAnesthesiaAnesthesia for inhaled foreign bodies

This chapter contains several hypothetical clinical situations that are discussed in detail to show some management options and why one option might be better than others. It will also be useful for readers preparing for the short answer question section of the exams. Although the questions are answered in an exam style, the answers are longer than would be expected in the usual short-answer format, and not every detail would be needed to score well in an exam.

## 31.1 An 8 Month Old, 10 kg Infant Presents for Laparotomy After a Failed Attempt at Reducing an Intussusception with a Barium Enema

1.  (i)
    
    **Describe and justify your perioperative fluid management**
    
    These infants are often unwell and hypovolemic from vomiting, bowel losses and rectal bleeding, and may be septicemic. Hypotension at induction is a concern, and I would ensure the infant has received 10–30 mL/kg of 0.9% saline or Hartmanns (CSL) fluid during resuscitation before induction. The response to every bolus would be assessed to guide further fluid resuscitation. 5–10 mL/kg fluid boluses could be given over 15–30 min using an infusion pump if available or by manually infusing using a three-way tap and 10 mL syringe as a ‘piston-pump’ (see Chap. [5](467929_2_En_5_Chapter.xhtml), Sect. [5.​4.​4](467929_2_En_5_Chapter.xhtml#Sec18)).
    
    During anesthesia and surgery, any blood or fluid loss would be replaced with isotonic fluid such as Hartmanns. Ongoing maintenance fluid for a laparotomy is around 10 mL/kg/h, and this would be given in addition to any losses. Fluid status would be assessed by monitoring heart rate, BP, urine output, the plethysmographic or arterial trace variation with ventilation and arterial blood gases to monitor the pH, bicarbonate and lactate concentrations. The hemoglobin level would also be regularly measured, and the decision to transfuse dependent on (i) hemoglobin concentration, (ii) the likelihood of further blood loss during surgery, and (iii) the infant’s cardiovascular stability. This infant does not need any glucose intraoperatively because gluconeogenesis is effective in an infant of this age and surgical stress is likely to trigger a hyperglycemic response.
    
    Post operatively, the infant will have no oral intake. The basic maintenance rate for IV fluids for this infant is 4 mL/kg/h, or 40 mL/h. Although there is likely to be an increase in ADH secretion and fluid retention postoperatively, there will also be extravascular space losses into the peritoneal cavity, and possibly blood loss. It would therefore be reasonable to increase the maintenance rate to 50 mL/h to allow for this and frequently assess fluid status based on observations, urine output and peripheral perfusion. The infant will need glucose postoperatively while fasting. A suitable fluid needs to be a salt-rich isotonic fluid containing glucose, such as 5% dextrose with saline 0.9%. Hypotonic fluids such as 2.5% dextrose with 0.45% saline may cause hyponatremia and should be avoided in this clinical scenario. Daily measurement of plasma electrolytes will be needed while the infant is on IV fluids.
    
2.  (ii)
    
    **At the completion of surgery, the hemoglobin is measured at 70 g/L. Would you transfuse this infant?**
    
    This is a low hemoglobin, and around the ‘transfusion trigger’ for children of 70–80 g/L. If the infant was previously well without cardiorespiratory disease, has stable blood pressure, pulse, respiratory rate and perfusion with urine output 10 mL/h and no ongoing blood loss, transfusion can be avoided. The Hb needs to be measured regularly to ensure it is not falling.
    
3.  (iii)
    
    **In what circumstances would it be reasonable to provide continuous epidural analgesia for postoperative pain relief in this child?**
    
    Epidural analgesia would be reasonable if the infant does not appear septic and has stable observations. The anesthetist must be trained and skilled at epidural insertion in smaller infants and postoperative ward staff must be trained and familiar with the management of epidurals in infants.
    

### 31.1.1 Further Commentary

Part (i) of the question asks only about perioperative fluid management. In an exam, no marks would be scored for mentioning induction technique. If it had been asked however, induction would include the fluid boluses discussed above, a modified rapid sequence induction, and a technique to prevent hypotension at induction. Such a technique might be fentanyl 1–2 μg/kg, allowing time for this to take effect to reduce the induction dose of propofol to about 2 mg/kg, or using ketamine 1–2 mg/kg for induction.

_See Chap._ [_15_](467929_2_En_15_Chapter.xhtml) _Sect._ [_15.11_](467929_2_En_15_Chapter.xhtml#Sec28) _about intussusception, and Chap._ [_5_](467929_2_En_5_Chapter.xhtml) _Sects._ [_5.3_](467929_2_En_5_Chapter.xhtml#Sec9) _and_ [_5.4_](467929_2_En_5_Chapter.xhtml#Sec10) _about IV fluids._

## 31.2 A Girl Who Has Just Turned 9 Years Old and Weighs 26 kg Is Scheduled for Laparoscopic Appendicectomy. She Has a 36-h History of Abdominal Pain and Nausea, and Has an IV Line In Situ

1.  (i)
    
    **Describe your induction technique, including airway management.**
    
    This child is at risk of aspiration and will need a modified rapid sequence induction and endotracheal intubation. The formula for cuffed ETT size suggests 3.5 + 9/4 = 5.75 mmID ETT. I would choose to use a 5.5 mmID ETT, since rounding up to a size 6 mm ETT may result in the cuff catching at the cricoid ring.
    
    _**Induction technique:**_ Ensure preparation of equipment and drugs and confirm there is a skilled assistant who is familiar with the application of cricoid pressure in children. If there is concern the child is dehydrated or hypovolemic, a 10 mL/kg bolus of Hartmanns would be given before induction.
    
    I would use a modified rapid sequence induction with preoxygenation, fentanyl 0.5–1 μg/kg and propofol 4–5 mg/kg, followed by rocuronium 0.6 mg/kg, application of cricoid pressure and gentle mask ventilation with a high concentration of sevoflurane (4–6%) while monitoring blood pressure. After 2–3 min, or guided by a nerve stimulator assessing paralysis, intubation would be performed with the cuff of the ETT passed just beyond the vocal cords. After checking for ETCO2 and bilateral air entry, the assistant can release cricoid pressure.
    
2.  (ii)
    
    **During intubation, there is a good view of the vocal cords, but a 5.5 mmID and then a 5.0 cuffed ETT will not pass beyond the vocal cords. What will you do?**
    
    The first step would be to ensure the vocal cords are relaxed either clinically or by using a nerve stimulator to confirm muscle relaxation peripherally. Next I would choose a 5.0 UNcuffed ETT. A 4.5 mm cuffed ETT could be used instead, but the internal diameter is small and resistance high in a child of this age. All intubation attempts would be performed gently to avoid airway trauma. Dexamethasone 8–12 mg would be given to reduce the likelihood of airway edema and stridor after extubation, and an ENT review arranged postop. If an ETT even smaller then 5 uncuffed or 4.5 cuffed were needed for intubation, then edema causing critical airway narrowing and obstruction would become a concern, and keeping the child intubated postop until an urgent ENT review would probably be best.
    
3.  (iii)
    
    **Intubation was achieved with a 5.0 mmID uncuffed ETT and surgery was uneventful. A mildly inflamed, non-perforated appendix was removed. How will you ensure the child is comfortable postop?**
    
    A multimodal approach to analgesia would be appropriate, with intraoperative analgesia including morphine 4–5 mg (0.1–0.2 mg/kg), IV paracetamol 390 mg (15 mg/kg), parecoxib 15 mg (0.6 mg/kg) and local anesthetic infiltration to the laparoscope port sites with 8.5 mL of ropivacaine 0.75% (2.5 mg/kg maximum dose). Ondansetron 4 mg would reduce postoperative nausea and vomiting. The child is likely to tolerate oral fluids soon after surgery, and oral analgesia could be used. Oral paracetamol and ibuprofen could be given regularly, and oral oxycodone 2–4 mg 6 hourly as required. Isotonic IV fluids would be continued until the child is drinking adequate amounts.
    

### 31.2.1 Further Commentary

There are many possible ways of anesthetizing this child for this procedure, but the question has asked for the technique I would use. The answer needs to reflect the reasons for the method chosen. A modified rapid sequence induction (RSI) was used for this child. The classic RSI is an adult technique that cannot be brought across and used in children. It includes a predetermined dose of induction agent immediately followed by suxamethonium and then apnea until intubation. It includes the risks of hypoxia, awareness, and a hurried, traumatic intubation. Important factors leading to aspiration are insufficient anesthesia, coughing, and straining during induction or intubation. The hurried nature of RSI does not ensure the absence of these factors.

Gentle mask ventilation is safe during cricoid pressure, does not inflate the stomach and prevents apnea and hypoxia. Because mask ventilation is performed before intubation, there is no need to obtain a rapid paralysis, and a standard dose of rocuronium can be used. Children also benefit from a faster onset of relaxants. Over-pressuring with a high concentration of sevoflurane enhances muscle relaxation and prevents awareness (because the brain concentration of sevoflurane will be lower than the inspired concentration over the short time of induction). Monitoring of relaxation to determine the time of intubation is optimal, but it may not always be possible to apply the monitor before induction, and it is difficult to apply once the assistant is busy performing cricoid pressure.

Cricoid pressure was used for this child. There has been debate about the effectiveness of cricoid pressure, particularly since it can make intubation more difficult. Although some have abandoned its use, it is still a common part of anesthesia and reasonable to persist with at this stage. However, it should be lessened or removed if there is mask ventilation is difficult or of intubation is difficult.

Sometimes the bulky, low pressure high volume cuff of the ETT gets held up at the cricoid ring during intubation, and one size smaller than expected needs to be used. In this child however, a 5.0 tube won’t pass either. This is the correct size ETT for a 6 or 7 year old, and it is unusual that it won’t pass in a 9 year old. A cautious approach to intubation is needed to avoid severe stridor and upper airway obstruction after surgery. Dexamethasone is given to reduce edema at the cricoid, and this is particularly important in young children who already have a small airway diameter. A small concern about dexamethasone for the scenario patient is the concurrent appendicitis and any possible immunosuppression it might cause.

_See also Chap._ [_1_](467929_2_En_1_Chapter.xhtml) _, Sect._ [_1.6.3_](467929_2_En_1_Chapter.xhtml#Sec15) _about rapid sequence induction, Chap._ [_4_](467929_2_En_4_Chapter.xhtml) _Sect._ [_4.7.1_](467929_2_En_4_Chapter.xhtml#Sec26) _about cuffed endotracheal tubes, and Chap._ [_9_](467929_2_En_9_Chapter.xhtml) _Sect._ [_9.3_](467929_2_En_9_Chapter.xhtml#Sec6) _about analgesics._

## 31.3 A 12 Year Old Girl Is Admitted for a Diagnostic Gastroscopy

1.  (i)
    
    **Describe your anesthetic technique for this child.**
    
    After preoperative assessment and obtaining informed consent from the parent and assent from the girl, induction would be performed in an area with suitable equipment, monitoring and skilled assistance.
    
    After either inhalational or IV induction, anesthesia would be maintained with bolus doses of propofol containing alfentanil 25 μg/mL. Dosing would be adequate to provide unconsciousness, immobility, and to suppress upper airway reflexes while avoiding excessive amounts causing apnea. Equipment to support respiration would be immediately available.
    
2.  (ii)
    
    **On arrival in theater, she is anxious and upset. She tells you she doesn’t want the procedure anymore. Her mother is present in theater and insists you go ahead with the anesthetic. How would you proceed in this scenario?**
    
    She is having an elective procedure which could be rescheduled if required, though this has implications for the family’s and health care facility’s time and use of resources. Although she might be less anxious on another day, simply rescheduling may not improve the situation next time.
    
    She is younger than the legal age to consent or withhold consent, and the parent is able to decide for her at this age. Although she is an older child at 12 years of age, she is unlikely to be Gillick-competent because of her extreme anxiety affecting her reasoning—any long-term desire of hers to have the procedure and obtain a diagnosis of her condition is overwhelmed by her acute anxiety and short-term desire to avoid anesthesia and the procedure. She is too old to restrain, and to do so would be extremely upsetting for her, her mother and all staff present.
    
    The first step would be a discussion with her about the reasons for her anxiety. At this age, children often fear awareness, death or pain. Discussion with her and her mother about her fears may be enough for her to regain her confidence and cooperation. Nevertheless, induction of anesthesia is a stressful time for any person, and she may also benefit from premedication such as oral midazolam 0.5 mg/kg to a maximum of 15 mg given 30 min before induction.
    
    If these steps weren’t successful, rescheduling of the gastroscopy could be considered after discussion with the proceduralist about its urgency. The child could be taught coping skills by a psychologist in the interim. A premed given in a planned manner at the next admission, before her anxiety has escalated, may also be more effective.
    

_See also Chap._ [_1_](467929_2_En_1_Chapter.xhtml) _, Sect._ [_1.4_](467929_2_En_1_Chapter.xhtml#Sec5) _about consent and Gillick competency, and Chap._ [_27_](467929_2_En_27_Chapter.xhtml) _, Sect._ [_27.6_](467929_2_En_27_Chapter.xhtml#Sec18) _about endoscopy._

## 31.4 A 2 Year Old Child Is Scheduled for Rigid Bronchoscopy and Possible Removal of an Inhaled Foreign Body

1.  (i)
    
    **How is the diagnosis of an** **inhaled foreign body** **made in young children?**
    
    _**History:**_ The caregiver may witness the child choking on an object. There is usually a sudden onset of symptoms including cough, wheeze or stridor. If the foreign body is large and lodges high in the respiratory tract (larynx or trachea), the child may have sudden onset of choking, breathlessness, cyanosis or stridor. Some cases may be subtle with cough, persistent chest infections or wheeze and can be difficult to differentiate from other common pediatric respiratory conditions, such as croup, asthma and pneumonia.
    
    _**Examination**_ may be normal, but may reveal tachypnea, wheeze or absent breath sounds on the affected side, or in more severe cases, cyanosis or respiratory distress.
    
    _**Investigations:**_ A chest X-ray is often normal, as most foreign bodies are radiolucent. It may show atelectasis or consolidation from blockage of a bronchus. The expiratory chest X-ray classically shows hyperinflation of the affected side, due to the foreign body acting as a ball valve and trapping gas distally, but this is uncommon. CT scanning sometimes shows a foreign body but may also delay diagnosis. Sometimes bronchoscopy must be performed to exclude an inhaled foreign body.
    
2.  (ii)
    
    **The child has a cough and quiet expiratory stridor, but has no respiratory distress and is otherwise well. SpO** **2** **breathing air is 97%. Outline your anesthesia technique and the rationale for it.**
    
    I would begin by discussing the surgeon’s planned technique for bronchoscopy, the plan for anesthesia, and how we will communicate about ventilation and the airway during the bronchoscopy. After ensuring there is skilled assistance and preferably a second anesthetist, an inhalational induction with sevoflurane in 100% oxygen would be performed. This allows a gradual onset of anesthesia, and allows the airway patency and the ability to gently assist ventilation to be assessed. Using 100% oxygen during induction preoxygenates the child.
    
    After induction and insertion of an IV catheter, a bolus of propofol 1–2 mg/kg would be given to suppress laryngeal reflexes, direct laryngoscopy performed and the vocal cords and trachea sprayed with 2% lidocaine 3 mg/kg using an atomizer spray device. Fentanyl 0.5 μg/kg would be given incrementally (avoiding apnea) to supplement anesthesia. Mask anesthesia would then continue until bronchoscopy begins.
    
    I would choose to use a pediatric T-piece circuit for this procedure because it is lightweight when attached to the bronchoscope and allows rapid changes in the inspired concentration of volatile agent. I can also assess lung compliance if there are problems with ventilation in this small child more readily with the T-piece than with a circle circuit.
    
    When the surgeon is ready to begin bronchoscopy, the face mask would be removed, the bronchoscope inserted and the anesthetic circuit connected to the side arm of the ventilating bronchoscope. I would give 4–6% sevoflurane in 4–6 L/min of 100% oxygen during the procedure. Propofol boluses 1–2 mg/kg would be given to quickly deepen anesthesia if required. If the child was breathing spontaneously without coughing and remaining immobile, anesthesia would continue while monitoring the adequacy of ventilation and depth of anesthesia. If the child seemed inadequately anesthetized with either coughing, movement or breath-holding, anesthesia would be deepened with sevoflurane and propofol, and gentle ventilation.
    
    When the surgeon removes the eyepiece of the bronchoscope, I would stop ventilation and temporarily turn off the sevoflurane to reduce theatre pollution.
    
    If the procedure is difficult or prolonged, dexamethasone 0.5–0.6 mg/kg could be considered to reduce edema at the cricoid that might be caused by passage of the bronchoscope—this could be discussed with the ENT surgeon performing the procedure. IV fluids would be given because the child will not be able to drink until 60 min after the vocal cords were sprayed with lidocaine.
    
    At the end of the procedure when the bronchoscope is removed, the facemask would be reapplied and the child placed in the left lateral position. I would give oxygen and remain with the child monitoring them until awake.
    
3.  (iii)
    
    **List the possible causes of hypoxemia during rigid** **bronchoscopy**
    
    The bronchoscope within a mainstem bronchus or beyond (only one lung being ventilated)
    
    Anesthesia inadequate with coughing, bucking, abdominal-wall rigidity
    
    Prolonged apnea or hypoventilation
    
    The foreign body shifting to block a mainstem bronchus, the trachea or the larynx
    
    Atelectasis of the lung
    
    Measurement error
    
    Equipment problems
    

### 31.4.1 Further Commentary

Some would use TIVA for these cases, and this is particularly useful for difficult, prolonged procedures during which the window of the bronchoscope is removed frequently and for prolonged periods. A small dose of fentanyl supplements propofol and volatile anesthesia, but the dose must be cautious to avoid apnea or hypoventilation. Some would use alfentanil instead. Some others would use remifentanil or ketamine with propofol.

_See also Chap._ [_17_](467929_2_En_17_Chapter.xhtml) _for discussion of alternatives during bronchoscopy—spontaneous or controlled ventilation, volatile or intravenous anesthesia._

## 31.5 You Are to Anesthetize a 3.5 kg Neonate for Laparotomy. Justify the Endotracheal Tube You Would Use for This Neonate

This neonate (first 30 days) weighs 3.5 kg and therefore likely to be near term, and not preterm.

I would use a size 3 mmID microcuff ETT with the cuff inflated at or below 20 cmH2O. If it does not easily pass the subglottis, I would use a 3 mmID UNcuffed ETT.

This ETT was chosen because it has a high volume, low pressure cuff and there is evidence it is safe in this age group. Compared with an uncuffed ETT, there will be no leak, PEEP can be applied without difficulty and the ETCO2 and tidal volumes can be measured more accurately. Lower fresh gas flow rates can be used and pollution with anesthetic gases leaking around the ETT is avoided. The size of the ETT is more likely to be correct at the first attempt compared to an uncuffed ETT, so there will be less tube changes and possible complications from the changes. The smaller internal diameter of the cuffed ETT will increase resistance compared to the larger uncuffed ETT for this age, but this would not be an issue because ventilation will be used during anesthesia.

The laparotomy will be associated with changes in abdominal tension and lung compliance, and a cuffed ETT may allow better control of ventilation with changes in compliance. The laparotomy may be associated with a regurgitation and aspiration risk, and the cuffed ETT might provide better protection than an uncuffed ETT.

_You could write a paragraph justifying an uncuffed ETT if you chose that instead. See Chap._ [_4_](467929_2_En_4_Chapter.xhtml) _Sect._ [_4.7.2_](467929_2_En_4_Chapter.xhtml#Sec27) _and Chap._ [_14_](467929_2_En_14_Chapter.xhtml) _Sect._ [_14.9.4_](467929_2_En_14_Chapter.xhtml#Sec25) _._

## 31.6 A 6 Year Old Boy with Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) Presents for Emergency Open Reduction and Fixation of His Fractured Tibia. He Is Usually Well and Active, and Has Been Taking Oral Prednisolone for More Than 1 Year. He Last Ate 12 h Ago

1.  (i)
    
    **What are the concerns for anesthesia for this boy?**
    
    The anesthetic concerns are:
    
    1.   (i)
        
        Suxamethonium is contraindicated in DMD as it may cause rhabdomyolysis and hyperkalemic cardiac arrest.
        
    2.  (ii)
        
        There are many reports of volatile anesthetic agents triggering rhabdomyolysis in DMD.
        
    3.  (iii)
        
        He is taking long-term steroids for the management of his muscular dystrophy, and may need steroid cover.
        
    4.  (iv)
        
        He has a chronic medical condition, is likely to have a lot to do with hospitals, and may be wary and anxious of medical procedures.
        
    5.  (v)
        
        Emergency surgery is planned, and there is a risk of aspiration during anesthesia. However, the fasting duration is acceptable.
        
    
2.  (ii)
    
    **Are there any investigations you would like to perform before anesthesia and surgery?**
    
    Routine electrolytes and hemoglobin levels are unlikely to be helpful. The creatine kinase could be measured, but will be elevated and will not contribute to any decisions about anesthesia. Children with Duchenne muscular dystrophy can develop cardio-respiratory problems, but this child is active and young, and unlikely to have developed these problems yet.
    
3.  (iii)
    
    **Outline your anesthetic technique for him**
    
    Could use spinal or epidural anesthesia for this procedure—potential problems:
    
    -   Managing the child’s anxiety while performing the block and during surgery,
        
    -   Dealing with inadequate analgesia from the block
        
    -   Possibility of hurriedly converting to general anesthesia during surgery
        
    -   Not accustomed with technique in children
        
    -   More familiar with general anesthesia, and would choose this but avoid volatile anesthetic agents and maintain anesthesia with propofol.
        
    
    Technique would include:
    
    -   Prepare anesthetic machine by removing the vaporizer.
        
    -   Premedication with oral midazolam 0.3–0.5 mg/kg 30 min before induction, to reduce anxiety and facilitate IV insertion (since inhalational induction after a failed IV insertion is not possible).
        
    -   IV induction with propofol 4–5 mg/kg, depending on the effect of the premed on the child (premed will reduce the dose of propofol needed for induction).
        
    -   Size 2.5 LMA to avoid muscle relaxant.
        
    -   Maintain anesthesia with nitrous oxide in oxygen and propofol infusion starting at 15 mg/kg/h, reducing to 12–13 mg/kg/h after 15 min, then 11 mg/kg after another 15 min, and 10 mg/kg thereafter (Macfarlane regimen), depending on depth of anesthesia and response to surgery.
        
    -   BIS monitor because IV anesthesia has a greater risk of awareness; careful monitoring of clinical depth.
        
    -   Steroid cover with IV hydrocortisone will be needed for the surgical stress response. It would be appropriate to seek advice from pediatric endocrinology about this. In the interim, hydrocortisone 2.5 mg/kg (maximum 50 mg) would be given during surgery.
        
    -   Analgesia with morphine 0.1 mg/kg, IV paracetamol 15 mg/kg, and infiltration of the wounds with local anesthetic.
        
    -   Ondansetron IV and Hartmanns IV fluid
        
    -   Oral paracetamol and ibuprofen postoperatively
        
    -   Depending on extent of surgery, oral opioids (oxycodone 0.1 mg/kg) or IV PCA morphine.
        
    
4.  (iv)
    
    **You have attempted to insert an IV cannula to induce anesthesia 3 times but have not succeeded. The child is upset and fearful. What will you do?**
    
    It would be reasonable to ask another anesthetist for help with the IV
    
    Nitrous oxide during attempted insertion
    
    Give another oral premed, such as ketamine and try again when premed is effective
    
    Induce anesthesia with IM ketamine 5 mg/kg
    

_See Chap._ [_12_](467929_2_En_12_Chapter.xhtml) _Sect._ [_12.2.3_](467929_2_En_12_Chapter.xhtml#Sec8) _about muscular dystrophy._

### Further Reading

1.  Simpson RS, Van K. Fatal rhabdomyolysis following volatile induction in a six year old boy with Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2014;42(1):805–7.
    
2.  Taylor IN, Kenny GNC, Glen JB. Pharmacodynamic stability of a mixture of propofol and alfentanil. Br J Anaesth. 1992;69:168–71.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/69.2.168)