Short-Answer Questions from Past FANZCA and FRCA Examinations

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

Craig Sims, Dana Weber and Chris Johnson (eds.) A Guide to Pediatric Anesthesia[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4\_33](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4_33)

# 33. Short-Answer Questions from Past FANZCA and FRCA Examinations

Craig Sims[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor1)  

(1)

Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Perth Children’s Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia

Craig Sims

Email: [craig.sims@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:craig.sims@health.wa.gov.au)

Listed below are the pediatric anesthesia short-answer questions that have been recently asked in the Australasian and UK Fellowship exams at the time of printing. The questions are listed in the chronological order in which they were set.

We gratefully acknowledge the assistance received in the preparation of this section from the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists. Questions are reproduced with permission from the Australian and New Zealand College of Anaesthetists, January 2019.

We would also like to gratefully acknowledge the assistance received from The Royal College of Anaesthetists in the United Kingdom.

Percentages shown in brackets indicate allocation of marks for that part of the question.

∗ Indicates the question was asked more than once during this time period.

## 33.1 FANZCA Short-Answer Questions 2014–2018

1.  1.
    
    Outline the advantages and disadvantages of using the paediatric circle system and the Jackson-Rees modification of Ayre’s T-piece (Mapleson F) for anaesthesia in a 15 kg child.∗
    
    23.3% and later 70.8% of candidates passed this question.
    
2.  2.
    
    An 8 week old baby is scheduled for an inguinal hernia repair on your list at a local general hospital tomorrow.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        Outline the important issues when providing anaesthesia care for this baby. (70%)
        
    2.  (b)
        
        Justify your decision to proceed with surgery at the local general hospital. (30%)
        
    
    45.8% of candidates passed this question.
    
3.  3.
    
    A 3 year old child requires an adenotonsillectomy for obstructive sleep apnoea.
    
    Outline and justify your peri-operative management plan.
    
    50.3% of candidates passed this question.
    
4.  4.
    
    A 6-week-old term baby weighing 4.0 kg requires pyloromyotomy for pyloric stenosis.
    
    How would you assess the baby’s hydration status? (50%)
    
    Detail and justify your resuscitation regimen. (50%)
    
    80% of candidates passed this question.
    
5.  5.
    
    A 2-year-old boy scheduled for hypospadias repair is found to have a precordial murmur. Justify your decision to proceed.
    
    74.3% of candidates passed this question.
    
6.  6.
    
    Describe the anatomy relevant to performing a caudal block in a 2-year-old male.
    
    40.5% of candidates passed this question.
    
7.  7.
    
    Describe your assessment of a 4-year-old child who has been rescued from a house fire.
    
    24.9% of candidates passed this question.
    
    _Editor’s note: This question asks for_ _**assessment**_ _, not management_
    

## 33.2 FRCA Short-Answer Questions 2014–2018

1.  (a)
    
    List the normal anatomical features of young children (<3 years old) which may adversely affect upper airway management. (35%)
    
    1.  (b)
        
        Which airway problems may occur due to these anatomical features? (30%)
        
    2.  (c)
        
        Outline how these problems are overcome in clinical practice. (35%).
        
    
    65% of candidates passed this question.
    
    _Editor’s note: The Examiner’s report indicated a table with columns such as ‘Anatomical feature’, ‘Problem’ and ‘Managed by’ was an acceptable way to answer this question. A table is also a good way to answer questions about the advantages and disadvantages of something._
    
2.  1.
    
    A 5 year-old child presenting for day case dental surgery under general anaesthesia is found to have a heart murmur that has not been documented previously.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        What features of the history (5 marks) and examination (5 marks) might suggest that the child has a significant congenital heart disease (CHD)?
        
    2.  (b)
        
        If the murmur is caused by an atrial septal defect (ASD) what ECG findings would you expect? (2 marks)
        
    3.  (c)
        
        Which imaging modalities might be used in the assessment of the ASD (2 marks) and what specific additional information may be obtained? (2 marks)
        
    4.  (d)
        
        List the current national guidelines regarding prophylaxis against infective endocarditis in children with CHD undergoing dental procedures. (4 marks)
        
    
    39.1% of candidates passed this question
    
3.  2.
    
    A 5 year-old boy with Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is listed for dental extractions as a day case.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        What constitutes ASD (1 mark) and what are the key clinical features? (6 marks)
        
    2.  (b)
        
        List the important issues when providing anaesthesia for dental extractions in children. (6 marks)
        
    3.  (c)
        
        Give the specific problems of providing anaesthesia for children with ASD and outline possible solutions. (7 marks)
        
    
    46.2% of candidates passed this question.
    
    _Editor’s note: ‘part b’ refers children in general, not just those with ASD_.
    
4.  3.
    
    You are called to the Emergency Department to see a 2 year-old child who presents with a 4-h history of high temperature and drowsiness. On examination there is prolonged capillary refill time and a non-blanching rash. A presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal septicaemia is made.∗
    
    1.  (a)
        
        What are the normal weight, pulse rate, mean arterial blood pressure and capillary refill time for a child of this age? (4 marks)
        
    2.  (b)
        
        Define appropriate resuscitation goals for this child (2 marks) and outline the management in the first 15 min after presentation. (7 marks)
        
    3.  (c)
        
        After 15 min, the child remains shocked and is unresponsive to fluid. What is the most likely pathophysiological derangement in this child’s circulation (2 marks) and what are the important further treatment options? (5 marks)
        
    
    56.9% and later 64.2% of candidates passed this question
    
    _Editor’s note: Be careful not to answer part c in the answer of part b_.
    
5.  4.
    
    You have anaesthetised a 5-year-old boy for manipulation of a forearm fracture. During the operation you notice that he has multiple bruises on his upper arms and body that you think may indicate child abuse.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        Which other types of physical injury should raise concerns of abuse in a child of this age? (6 marks)
        
    2.  (b)
        
        What timely actions must be taken as a result of your concerns? (7 marks)
        
    3.  (c)
        
        List parental factors (5 marks) and features of a child’s past medical history (2 marks) that are known to increase the risk of child abuse.
        
    
    44.7% of candidates passed this question
    
6.  5.
    
    A 5-year-old child with Down’s syndrome (trisomy 21) is scheduled for adenotonsillectomy.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        List the cardiovascular (2 marks), airway/respiratory (5 marks) and neurological (3 marks) problems that are associated with this syndrome in children and are of relevance to the anaesthetist.
        
    2.  (b)
        
        What are the potential problems during induction of anaesthesia and initial airway management in this patient? (6 marks)
        
    3.  (c)
        
        What are the possible specific difficulties in the postoperative management of this child? (4 marks)
        
    
    62.1% of candidates passed this question
    
7.  6.
    
    A 12-week-old male baby presents for a unilateral inguinal hernia repair. He was born at 30 weeks gestation (30/40).
    
    1.  (a)
        
        What are the specific perioperative concerns in this baby? (11 marks)
        
    2.  (b)
        
        What are the options for anaesthesia? (4 marks)
        
    3.  (c)
        
        Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of general anaesthesia for this baby. (5 marks)
        
    
    28% of candidates passed this question.
    
8.  7.
    
    A 5-year-old boy presents for a myringotomy and grommet insertion as a day case. During your pre-operative assessment you notice that he has a nasal discharge.\*
    
    1.  (a)
        
        List the features in the history (5 marks) and examination (6 marks) that would potentially cause an increased risk of airway complications?
        
    2.  (b)
        
        Why would it be inappropriate to cancel the operation? (6 marks)
        
    3.  (c)
        
        What social factors would prevent this child being treated as a day case? (3 marks)
        
    
    74% of candidates passed this question.
    
9.  8.
    
    An 8 year old child is scheduled for an elective right femoral osteotomy due to impending dislocation of the hip. She has severe cerebral palsy.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        What is cerebral palsy? (3 marks)
        
    2.  (b)
        
        List typical clinical features of severe cerebral palsy, with their associated anaesthetic implications. Do this for the central nervous system (3 marks), respiratory system (2 marks), musculoskeletal system (3 marks) and gastrointestinal system (2 marks).
        
    3.  (c)
        
        What are the expected problems in providing adequate postoperative analgesia in this patient? (2 marks)
        
    4.  (d)
        
        Outline a management plan to optimise analgesia in this patient. (5 marks)
        
    
    78.8% of candidates passed this question
    
10.  9.
     
     You are asked to assess a 15kg 4-year-old child who is scheduled for a strabismus (squint) correction as a day case procedure.
     
     1.  (a)
         
         List the anaesthetic considerations of this case, with regards to: age of the patient (4 marks), day case surgery (3 marks) and type of surgery. (4 marks)
         
     2.  (b)
         
         During the operation, the patient suddenly develops a profound bradycardia. What is your immediate management of this situation? (2 marks)
         
     3.  (c)
         
         What strategies would you employ to reduce postoperative nausea and vomiting (4 marks) and postoperative pain? (3 marks)
         
         51.6% of candidates passed this question.