The Child at Risk: Child Protection and the Anesthetist

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

Craig Sims, Dana Weber and Chris Johnson (eds.) A Guide to Pediatric Anesthesia[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4\_29](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4_29)

# 29. The Child at Risk: Child Protection and the Anesthetist

Craig Sims[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor1)   and Dana Weber[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor2)  

(1)

Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Perth Children’s Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia

Craig Sims (Corresponding author)

Email: [craig.sims@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:craig.sims@health.wa.gov.au)

Dana Weber

Email: [dana.weber@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:dana.weber@health.wa.gov.au)

### Keywords

Non accidental injuryDetectionSuspicious fracturesChild abuse injury patterns

Anesthetists may encounter children who have been physically or sexually abused. There are ethical and legal obligations to protect the child in this circumstance. The safety of the child is paramount and overrides all other considerations. Surgeons, nurses and all other health workers have the same legal obligation to report suspected child abuse. They should have training in child protection and be aware of the arrangements for child protection in their own hospitals. Although doctors have obligations to maintain patient confidentiality, the legal obligations to report suspected child abuse over ride confidentiality considerations. Modern societies have specific legislation dealing with these obligations, such as the 2004 Children’s Act in the United Kingdom and state-based legislation in Australia. New Zealand does not yet have legislation for mandatory reporting of suspected child abuse.

## 29.1 Detection of Abuse

The anesthetist may be the first person to notice the signs of child abuse, either as part of the preoperative assessment or in theater. Alternatively, the anesthetist may be present when the surgeon or nursing staff notice signs, and rarely a child may disclose abuse to the anesthetist. Anesthetists involved in resuscitation or intensive care may also notice signs of abuse (Table [29.1](#Tab1)).

Table 29.1

Situations when the anesthetist may encounter possible child abuse

| 
Situations when the anesthetist may be involved with suspected child abuse

 |
| --- |
| 

Notices signs at preoperative assessment or in theater

 |
| 

Is present when surgeon or nursing staff discover signs

 |
| 

A child needs resuscitation or intensive care management with head injury or other injury without adequate explanation

 |
| 

A child may disclose abuse to anesthetist

 |
| 

Provides anesthesia for forensic examination of a child who is suspected of having been abused

 |

Certain characteristics of the child’s parents and social circumstances increase the risk of child abuse, and these are listed in Table [29.2](#Tab2). However, suspicion is usually raised due to the child’s type of injury, a discrepancy between the injury and the explanation of how it occurred, or the type of injury relative to the child’s age. There is also often a delay in seeking treatment. Traumatic injuries in young children not yet walking are unusual and are considered suspicious. For example, a fractured arm in a school aged child could quite plausibly be due to an accident, but a mid-shaft fracture of the humerus in a child aged less than 3 years is highly suggestive of abuse. Similarly, fractured ribs are very unusual in children in the absence of major trauma or an underlying bone abnormality.

Table 29.2

Risk factors for child abuse

| 
Risk factor

 |
| --- |
| 

Poor social circumstances, social isolation, poverty, child neglect

 |
| 

Parental alcohol or drug abuse

 |
| 

History of family violence or previous abuse

 |
| 

Single parent, stepfather living with child

 |

Bruising is common in all children and so is less specific of abuse, but widespread bruising in a child too young to walk, or in unusual places on the body would support other evidence of abuse. Infants are at risk of abuse from often young, overtired and inexperienced parents who cannot deal with the baby’s crying. ‘Shaken baby syndrome’ has long been recognized and consists of subdural hematoma, retinal hemorrhages and encephalopathy. Other injuries that strongly suggest abuse are listed in Table [29.3](#Tab3).

Table 29.3

Clinical signs that may indicate child abuse, depending on the child’s age and history of how the injury occurred

| 
Signs of abuse

 |
| --- |
| 

Significant bruising, especially in children too young to walk

 |
| 

Fractures in children too young to walk, rib fractures, multiple fractures or long bone fractures in young children

 |
| 

Cigarette burns or bite marks

 |
| 

Subdural hematoma and retinal hemorrhages in infants

 |
| 

Injuries in inaccessible places such as neck, ear, hands, feet and buttocks

 |
| 

Intra-oral trauma, damage to frenulum, especially in children too young to walk

 |
| 

Genital or anal trauma

 |
| 

Trauma without adequate reason for its occurrence

 |
| 

Multiple injuries of different ages

 |
| 

Delayed presentation

 |

### Keypoint

Child abuse is suspected by considering the age of the child, the type of injuries, the reported mechanism of injury and the social circumstances of the child. Any one sign by itself is rarely diagnostic.

## 29.2 Obligations of Health Care Workers

Health care workers, including anesthetists, are obliged to report their suspicions of child abuse (Table [29.4](#Tab4)). Pediatricians are the group of doctors most commonly involved in suspected child abuse and are likely to have the most experience. It is therefore useful for the anesthetist to discuss any concerns with the Duty Pediatrician in a hospital. Alternatively, every children’s hospital has a child protection unit from which advice can be obtained. Social Services can also be approached directly or by the pediatrician. The child may need to stay in hospital for his or her protection.

Table 29.4

Obligations of the anesthetist when caring for children

| 
Obligations of the anesthetist

 |
| --- |
| 

Act in the best interests of child

 |
| 

Be aware of the child’s rights to protection

 |
| 

Respect the child’s right to confidentiality

 |
| 

Contact experienced pediatrician, social worker or Social Services if child abuse is suspected

 |
| 

Be aware of local child protection mechanisms

 |
| 

Be aware of parent’s rights.

 |

Consent needs to be obtained from the parent or guardian for anything more than a visual inspection of suspected injuries. Consent for surgery and anesthesia does not give consent for examination in relation to suspected child abuse. Parents (and the child if he or she is old enough and it is appropriate) should always be informed of the suspicions, except in rare cases where this is not in the best interest of the child. Consent for further examinations would usually be obtained by the pediatrician. If the parent or guardian is not available or refuses consent, then medical administration is contacted and legal advice sought. In cases of child sexual abuse, pediatricians with specific expertise in child sexual abuse and forensic examination are required. Colposcopy, photography and forensic sampling under anesthesia may be carried out in these cases.

## Review Question

1.  1.
    
    A 4 year old boy weighing 15 kg presents for day surgery repair of a left inguinal hernia for which you plan general anesthesia and a caudal block. He is well and has no significant past history. When you position him for the caudal block, you notice some bruises on his legs and buttocks.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        What pattern of bruising would be suspicious in this child?
        
    2.  (b)
        
        List the clinical features that would arouse suspicion that physical child abuse has occurred
        
    3.  (c)
        
        What should the anesthetist do if they suspect child abuse has taken place?
        
    

### Further Reading

1.  Child protection and the anaesthetist: safeguarding children in the operating theatre. Royal College of Anaesthetists. 2014. [https://​www.​rcoa.​ac.​uk/​document-store/​child-protection-and-the-anaesthetist](https://www.rcoa.ac.uk/document-store/child-protection-and-the-anaesthetist). Accessed July 2019.
    
2.  Melarkode K, Wilkinson K. Child protection issues and the anaesthetist. Cont Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2012;12:123–7.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mks003)
    
3.  Winterton PM. Child protection and the health professional: mandatory responding is our duty. Med J Aust. 2009;191:246. An editorial that makes some good points about the issue_._[PubMed](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Abstract&list_uids=19740042)