Procedural Sedationsedation for procedures: Anesthesia and Sedation of Children Away from the OR

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

Craig Sims, Dana Weber and Chris Johnson (eds.) A Guide to Pediatric Anesthesia[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4\_27](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4_27)

# 27. Procedural Sedation: Anesthesia and Sedation of Children Away from the OR

Tanya Farrell[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor1)  

(1)

Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Perth Children’s Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia

Tanya Farrell

Email: [Tanya.Farrell@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:Tanya.Farrell@health.wa.gov.au)

### Keywords

Pediatric gastroscopySedation of childrenKetamine sedationPediatric MRI anesthesiaNitrous oxide sedation

Young children often need sedation for diagnostic or therapeutic procedures. The number of procedures is increasing as technology improves and many are performed in areas away from the operating room. Demand for sedation is also increasing because of cultural changes suggesting it is not acceptable to restrain children or subject them to frightening or painful procedures whilst awake. In addition, children presenting for some diagnostic procedures may have poorly delineated pathology and be quite unwell. The demand for sedation places pressure on the resources of anesthetic services, and techniques that do not require an anesthetist are often used. This chapter discusses the issues and techniques to safely sedate children for medical procedures.

## 27.1 Remote Location

Many diagnostic or therapeutic procedures are performed remote from the OR in areas as diverse as radiology, neurophysiology or oncology wards. These areas are usually poorly designed for anesthesia, with bulky equipment, poor lighting and often limited access to the child. Staff in these locations may be unfamiliar with anesthetic protocols and priorities. Extra vigilance is required when checking patient preparation and fasting, equipment, emergency supplies and the recovery area. Occasionally, procedures on children are carried out in adult hospitals due to limited facilities and expertise in smaller children’s hospitals. The lack of assistance and equipment on site and the transfer to and from the parent hospital add another element of risk.

## 27.2 Typical Procedures Requiring Sedation

Procedures such as echocardiograms, MRI scans and EEGs are not painful, but require the child to remain still for extended periods of time in an uncomfortable and frightening environment. Older children can cooperate, particularly if they are distracted. Babies up to 3 months old can usually be fed and wrapped up warmly—most will fall asleep (incredibly!) during the examination. Some children, especially preschool aged, can be difficult to image adequately while awake. Other diagnostic and therapeutic procedures such as lumbar punctures, bone marrow biopsies, nephrostomy insertion, and endoscopies are painful and require analgesia as well as sedation. These procedures, particularly those that are intermittently painful, are more difficult to provide safe sedation for—doses of agents sufficient to make the child comfortable during painful stimulation may then leave them excessively sedated or even apneic when the stimulation is removed.

### Keypoint

It is difficult to safely provide sedation for painful procedures in children, particularly when the pain is intermittent.

## 27.3 Sedation Versus General Anesthesia

The aims of sedation are to safely reduce fear and anxiety, increase compliance with the procedure and to control pain if necessary. Sedation has traditionally been described as a continuum from consciousness to unconsciousness (Table [27.1](#Tab1)). The endpoints of the different levels of this continuum however, are arbitrary and subjective. Personnel involved in monitoring sedation may not appreciate the levels are not discrete and are difficult to assess in young children who are also susceptible to fluctuations between the levels. There is also a dilemma in assessing sedation in children—rousing a settled child to assess the level of sedation may cause the procedure to be abandoned if the child then doesn’t settle again. Sometimes even inflating a blood pressure cuff may rouse the child, and so monitoring is sometimes more restricted than it might be for an adult. The development of a more objective model for sedation levels based upon cardiorespiratory monitoring rather than response to verbal or physical stimuli would allow closed medication loops and self-correction with automated algorithms. However, interindividual variation and argument over what constitutes moderate, deep sedation and general anesthesia have hampered progress in this area.

Table 27.1

Levels of sedation in children (based on American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines 2016)

| 
Level of sedation | Characteristics

 |
| --- | --- |
| 

Minimal sedation | Anxiolysis only (e.g. state induced by nitrous oxide at less than 50%)

 |
| 

Moderate sedation | Purposeful response to verbal command (also termed ‘conscious sedation’)

 |
| 

Deep sedation | Purposeful response after repeated verbal or painful stimuli. At risk of airway obstruction

 |
| 

Anesthesia | At risk of airway obstruction and may need ventilatory support

 |

### Note

The level of sedation is more difficult to assess in children—young children cannot talk and rousing a child to assess level might wake them completely. At the same time, they are more at risk of respiratory problems if sedation is not closely monitored.

Minimal and moderate sedation are rarely effective in children—small doses of sedation do not change a tired and hungry toddler into an awake yet co-operative patient. There is a tendency, especially in younger children, toward deeper sedation to produce the desired conditions. The increased risk of airway obstruction and cardiopulmonary depression, combined with problems associated with remote location and inexperienced staff can sometimes mean that general anesthesia is a safer option than sedation. This is especially pertinent for long procedures, medically compromised patients, or if procedures are painful or distressing.

There is an impression among non-anesthetists that sedation is safer than anesthesia. Many proceduralists will persist with attempts at deeper and deeper sedation, compromising safety that could otherwise be gained with more tightly controlled conditions and a protected the airway. Nevertheless, sedation, including sedation provided by non-anesthetic personnel, has advantages over general anesthesia in many children and for many procedures (Table [27.2](#Tab2)).

Table 27.2

Sedation versus general anesthesia for medical procedures-their advantages and disadvantages

|   | 
Sedation | General anesthesia

 |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 

Advantages | Less staff and equipment required | May need less preparation of child

 |
| 

May have faster recovery with less PONV or drowsiness | More reliable airway control

 |
| 

Movement less likely and procedure always completed

 |
| 

Disadvantages | Child may need preparation | More staff and equipment

 |
| 

May take time to titrate sedation to correct level | Extensive training required for personnel

 |
| 

Procedure not always completed | Greater propensity for PONV

 |

The actual levels of staffing and equipment required for sedation depends on the level of sedation used

Patient selection is critical to the success of sedation techniques (Table [27.3](#Tab3)). In some cases, general anesthesia a quicker alternative than the preparation for sedation and the slow onset of sedation agents. Some studies have compared anesthesia with sedation and concluded that anesthesia is more cost effective when the total time for induction, procedure and recovery is considered. On the other hand, the supply of highly trained personnel required for provision of anesthesia or deep sedation is far outstripped by demand in most hospitals.

Table 27.3

Contraindications to sedation (based on SIGN guidelines)

| 
Contraindications to sedation

 |
| --- |
| 

Abnormal airway (consider large tonsils, anatomical issues, sleep apnea)

 |
| 

Raised intracranial pressure or depressed conscious level

 |
| 

Reduced respiratory or cardiac function (including neuromuscular disease, active URTI)

 |
| 

Aspiration risk

 |
| 

Child too distressed despite adequate preparation

 |
| 

Older child with behavioral problems or informed refusal

 |
| 

Previous adverse reaction to sedative

 |

### Keypoint

Moderate sedation to complete a scan or procedure without complication is difficult in preschool aged children.

If minimal sedation does not provide co-operation, it may be safer and more time effective to arrange general anesthesia with airway protection.

## 27.4 Principles of Good Sedation Practice

Complications of sedation in children are difficult to quantify—the population is a heterogeneous group undergoing procedures in many clinical areas and with sedation administered by many different groups of personnel, and there is a tendency to under report incidents. There are several published documents of consensus suggesting principles of good sedation practice (including the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN), the American Academy of Pediatrics and NICE). Most of these highlight the following themes:

### 27.4.1 Assessment

Assessment before sedation detects cardio-respiratory problems, multi system disease, airway issues and drug history. There is a tendency to be less thorough in patients anticipated to require ‘just a little sedation’. Risks and benefits are discussed with the parents during the consultation.

### 27.4.2 Fasting

In general, fasting is the same for elective sedation cases as for general anesthetic techniques, and fasting patients in this manner has the advantage of flexibility to convert to general anesthesia if required. There is some evidence from emergency medicine however that shorter fasting times may be safe, and non-anesthetists sometimes follow these shorter times. Most studies conducted in this area, however, are underpowered and the true incidence of aspiration is not known.

### 27.4.3 Monitoring, Equipment and Personnel

The availability of equipment and drugs for monitoring, airway management and cardiopulmonary resuscitation are checked before starting sedation. More extensive monitoring and more personnel are required for deeper levels of sedation. Guidelines from colleges and professional societies outline these requirements. Pulse oximetry, respiratory rate, heart rate and sedation score is a minimum monitoring requirement, with access to NIBP measurement and ECG available if indicated. Facilities for emergency resuscitation are also essential, including two sources of oxygen, a self-inflating bag and mask of the correct size, suction equipment, equipment for IV access and airway management. Emergency drugs should be available (naloxone, flumazenil, atropine, suxamethonium, epinephrine (adrenaline), IV fluid).

### 27.4.4 Minimizing the Amount of Sedation

Techniques such as distraction, play therapy and guided imagery can be useful techniques to reduce the amount of sedation needed. Painful procedures may be converted to non-painful procedures with topical or local anesthetic agents. Most sedative agents are relatively safe when used on their own, but the success rate for single agents is lower than for drug combinations. The use of two or more agents however, causes greater inter-individual variation in effect and is associated with more adverse incidents. Not all attempts at sedation for a procedure will be successful—rather than persisting with other agents or higher doses, the child can be rescheduled for general anesthesia.

### 27.4.5 Competent Personnel

It is simply not possible for all sedation to be administered by anesthetists, non-anesthetic personnel give the majority of sedation for children. Besides placing an enormous workload upon stretched services, many procedures do not require the skill set of a specialist anesthetist. As a minimum, personnel administering sedation must be aware of the benefits and side effects of drugs used. At least one person involved must be up to date in resuscitation techniques and airway management for children, and familiar with the equipment required for emergency procedures. Non-anesthetists using techniques with multiple or IV agents must be able to recognize contraindications to sedation, and to manage children’s airways and resuscitation.

### 27.4.6 Recovery

Children should recover from sedation in a supervised area with access to monitoring, drugs and the equipment needed to deal with complications. Recovery of the child to the pre-sedated state with appropriate motor and verbal skills is witnessed and documented before discharge. Adequate recovery is important—the child may potentially be placed in a rear-facing car seat and could develop complications that aren’t noticed because the parent is focused on driving. Written information about the procedure performed, drugs given, discharge instructions and contact details is given at discharge.

### 27.4.7 Documentation

Documentation of drugs and observations is made as during general anesthesia.

## 27.5 Agents for Sedation

Non-pharmacological methods are outlined in the Chap. [3](467929_2_En_3_Chapter.xhtml), and include distraction techniques, guided imagery, hypnosis and parental presence.

### 27.5.1 Inhaled Agents

Nitrous oxide is widely used in children to facilitate procedures such as dental treatment, dressing changes and bone marrow biopsies. Small children are not able to use demand valves on intermittent flow machines (such as found in delivery suites), and continuous flow devices are used. Nitrous oxide is less useful in children younger than 2 or 3 years as they are often distressed by the face mask. Concentrations higher than 50% are considered a form of moderate or deep sedation. Problems include nausea and vomiting (8–20%) and scavenging of waste gas. Vitamin B12 metabolism does not seem to be affected, even with frequent use in children with burns. Methoxyflurane is a strong analgesic available in a small inhaler, but the problems of scavenging and renal toxicity limit its use.

### 27.5.2 Oral Agents

Oral sedative agents are simple to administer and commonly used. However, they are difficult to titrate, may have a slow or variable onset and may have a prolonged duration of action—the child may remain sedated for hours after a brief scan. Scheduling problems can occur while waiting for sedation adequate to begin the procedure. Oral agents include midazolam, chloral hydrate and barbiturates. Paradoxical hyperactivity or dysphoria is not uncommon.

### 27.5.3 Ketamine

Ketamine has a wide margin of safety, and is a good choice for painful procedures because of its analgesic properties. It is given by the oral, IM and IV routes, and Emergency Departments commonly use it for procedures. The minimum fasting period before ketamine can be safely used in the ED is not known. Fasting times shorter than general anesthesia are common, and there is no evidence of increased morbidity. The term ‘dissociative sedation’ is often used, but is confusing and unnecessary. Sedation is minimal at low doses of ketamine, moderate at higher doses, and deep (or anesthesia) at still higher doses. An IV dose of 1.5–2 mg/kg or intramuscular dose of 4 mg/kg is effective with a low rate of restraint to complete brief procedures. The IV route has a shorter recovery than the IM route. Dysphoria and hallucinations are less common in children than adults, but occasionally occur. If a benzodiazepine is given with ketamine, dysphoria and hallucinations are not reduced, but adverse respiratory events are more common. A benzodiazepine is therefore given only if needed to treat dysphoria or hallucinations. Occasionally, the antisialogues atropine or glycopyrronium bromide (glycopyrrolate) is required.

### 27.5.4 Fentanyl

Intravenous or intranasal fentanyl is useful for brief, painful procedures such as dressing changes or greenstick fracture reduction. Intranasal fentanyl 1.5 μg/kg by an atomizing device (to maximize mucosal absorption) is safe and effective.

### 27.5.5 Dexmedetomidine

Intravenous or nasal dexmedetomidine produces sedation and anxiolysis. It lowers heart rate (by prolonged atrio-ventricular conduction) and blood pressure. These effects are worsened by medications prolonging AV conduction such as digoxin, beta blockers and atropine. Apnea, airway obstruction and hypoxemia are less likely after dexmedetomidine than many other agents because it causes little respiratory depression. It is effective on its own or in combination with agents such as propofol or ketamine. The IV dose is a loading dose of 2–3 μg/kg given over 10 min, followed by 0.5–2 μg/kg/h (not more than 0.5 μg/kg/h for prolonged periods such as ICU sedation). Intranasal dexmedetomidine is given using an atomizing device with a dose of 1–3 μg/kg (by aerosol) followed by 1 μg/kg rescue doses 30–45 min after the first dose.

## 27.6 Sedation and Anesthesia for Upper Endoscopy

Gastro-duodenoscopy is a common procedure performed under sedation, deserving individual discussion as it involves the airway. Although it can be performed in awake, non-sedated children, it is usually performed with intravenous sedation or general anesthesia.

Children are at risk of airway and ventilation problems during endoscopy. The endoscope partly occupies the upper airway and may compress the trachea. There is gastric distension from air insufflation, and there is a risk of regurgitation and pulmonary aspiration. Because of these concerns, general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation is common in infants and children younger than 2 or 3 years.

Endoscopy in older children does not require intubation. Oxygen can be given through a nasal catheter or using a blow-by technique, and a bite block inserted to protect the endoscope during IV anesthesia. The anesthetic depth must provide unconsciousness and immobility and prevent laryngospasm, but also avoid apnea. If positive pressure ventilation is needed, the scope must be withdrawn from the child.

### Keypoint

Endoscopy in children: Shared airway may impede spontaneous respiration, the scope can compress the trachea, stomach distension affects ventilation, less reserve to deal with hypoventilation or apnea.

The LMA can be used during anesthesia for endoscopy. The proceduralist can negotiate the scope past a deflated LMA into the esophagus before the cuff is reinflated, but the LMA cuff can grip the scope and cause some difficulty with scope manipulation. The endoscope also causes a leak around the LMA cuff, which affects positive pressure ventilation and causes pollution of the room with volatile anesthetic agents. Nevertheless, IV anesthesia and an LMA is a useful technique because it permits some positive pressure ventilation if apnea occurs while the scope is in the child.

Children have strong pharyngeal and bite reflexes, and either deep sedation or general anesthesia is required to prevent movement, particularly during insertion of the endoscope. Propofol is often used, and its dose is reduced and the recovery time shortened by combining propofol with alfentanil or remifentanil.

Regardless of the technique employed, vigilance is required with regard to the airway throughout the procedure as the back and forth motion of the endoscope can easily dislodge an airway, and the deep sedation required to negotiate the scope past an oropharynx with an active cough and gag reflex can result in apnea. Topical anesthesia may reduce sedative dose, but the taste is often unacceptable to awake children, and may require fasting after the procedure if the gag continues to be suppressed.

### 27.6.1 Balloon Dilatation of the Esophagus

Some children undergo endoscopic balloon dilatation of the esophagus. These children may have had a tracheo-esophageal fistula repaired, in which case they will also have tracheomalacia, or an esophageal stricture after caustic ingestion. The inflated dilatation balloon occludes the trachea, and although intubation does not stop this, it assures ventilation when the balloon is deflated.

### Tip

Propofol with alfentanil 25 μg/mL is a useful IV anesthesia agent for pediatric endoscopy.

### 27.6.2 Ingestion of Button Batteries

Small, flat circular batteries are common in consumer electronics. They can be swallowed by young children and require endoscopic removal. The positive and negative terminals of the battery are close together and bridged by tissue. Current flowing between the terminals quickly causes a burn and perforation of the tissue. Batteries in the gastrointestinal tract (or nose) are urgently removed without waiting for the usual fasting duration.

## 27.7 Sedation for MRI

The last 10 years have seen an increase in demand for MRI with improved access and the advantages of better images and less radiation than CT. However, MRI scans take significantly longer and the scanner tunnel is quite narrow and noisy—a confronting prospect for children.

Many children will not require sedation or anesthesia. Young babies can be fed and wrapped warmly, falling asleep for long enough for the scan. Selected children from the age of 5 will tolerate an MRI with preparation and distraction (many scanners are set up with audio-visual devices that can be viewed while the scan is underway). Experienced MRI staff are able to manage these children during their scan and are able to determine which children will be suitable for these techniques, but significant amounts of scanner time will be lost establishing the technique in each individual instance.

There has been a great deal of work looking at the best method for obtaining scans in children who require sedation. Outcome measures are safety (with respiratory complications the most common) and completion of the scan with good quality images. For most services, the resources available and the factors considered in Table [27.2](#Tab2) determine the approach taken. The scarcest resources are MRI scanner time and specialist medical staff (anesthesia and radiology), and a balance needs to be struck to utilize these resources efficiently.

Potentially more scans can be completed in a given time with simple general anesthesia by an experienced anesthetic team. In this scenario, inhalational anesthesia and a supraglottic airway (unless contraindicated) is associated with the least number of complications and the quickest time to discharge. Sedation using agents such as propofol, dexmedetomidine, ketamine, and benzodiazepines have been described but with no particular advantage. They require IV access for induction, and pumps and lines for the scan. Children with complex medical issues having general anesthesia for an MRI scan represent an opportunity for specialist medical teams to carry out other investigations and procedures ‘while the patient is asleep’. This has benefits for the child, but the scanner time saved using general anesthesia can be lost performing other procedures.

Regardless of the personnel or technique to facilitate MRI scanning, MRI-compatible equipment to safely deal with complications or emergencies must be available. Part of this is assigning a craft group (usually medical imaging specialists) to ensure staff and equipment are safe to enter the scanner room.

### Keypoint

Several techniques achieve safe sedation for MRI, and the choice is determined by local factors and experience. Considerations include maintenance of a magnet-safe environment and effective resource utilization.

## 27.8 Nuclear Medicine Scans

Nuclear medicine scans are used to assess renal function (DTPA or MAG3 scan), to track tumors or before epilepsy surgery in children (PET scans). A radioactive tracer is injected at a predetermined time before the scan. Children need to be fasted and relatively still for approximately an hour following injection of a tagged glucose molecule for PET scan, while MIBG scans (for neuroblastoma or pheochromocytoma) usually take place within 24 h of injection. The scan itself is similar to a CT or MRI scan, and takes approximately 30–60 min. The scans are performed in areas not always equipped for anesthesia.

## Review Questions

1.  1.
    
    A 3 year old girl is being managed in ICU after an intracerebral hemorrhage. She is intubated and ventilated and you are going to take her to MRI for scanning. Describe the precautions you would take to prevent burns to the child in the scanner. Describe the other precautions you would take while the patient is having the scan.
    
2.  2.
    
    A 2 year old child is going to have a gastroscopy to investigate possible reflux. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the different ways to manage the airway in this child for this procedure?
    

### Further Reading

1.  Bailey CR. Sedation in children—is it time to change our practice? Anaesthesia. 2016;71:487–505.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.13447)
    
2.  Deasy C, Babl FE. Intravenous vs intramuscular ketamine for pediatric procedural sedation by emergency medicine specialists: a review. Pediatr Anesth. 2010;20:787–96.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9592.2010.03338.x)
    
3.  Green SM, Mason K. Stratification of sedation risk—a challenge to the sedation continuum. Pediatr Anesth. 2011;21:924–31.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9592.2011.03609.x)
    
4.  Hansen TG. Sedative medications outside the operating room and the pharmacology of sedatives. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2015;28:446–52.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACO.0000000000000202)
    
5.  Kanagasundaram SA, et al. Efficacy and safety of nitrous oxide in alleviating pain and anxiety during painful procedures. Arch Dis Child. 2001;84:492–5. A report on the use of nitrous oxide at Westmead Children’s, Sydney_._[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1136/adc.84.6.492)
    
6.  Li BL, et al. A comparison of intranasal dexmedetomidine for sedation in children administered either by atomiser or by drops. Anaesthesia. 2016;71:522–8.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.13407)
    
7.  Lightdale JR. Sedation for pediatric endoscopy. Tech Gastrointest Endosc. 2013;15:3–8. Concentrates on sedation rather GA, perhaps because of funding arrangements in the US_._[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tgie.2012.10.001)
    
8.  Schulte-Uentrop L, Goepfert MS. Anesthesia or sedation for MRI in children. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2010;23:513–7.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACO.0b013e32833bb524)
    
9.  Sury M. Conscious sedation in children. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2012;12:152–6.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mks008)
    
10.  Tobias JD. Sedation of infants and children outside of the operating room. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2015;28:478–85.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACO.0000000000000203)
     

### Guidelines

1.  Cote CJ, Wilson S. Guidelines for monitoring and management of pediatric patients before, during, and after sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures: update 2016. Pediatrics. 2016;138:e20161212.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1212)
    
2.  NHS National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. Sedation in children and young people. 2010. [http://​guidance.​nice.​org.​uk/​CG112](http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG112). Accessed July 2019.
    
3.  Sury M, et al. Sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures in children and young people: summary of NICE guidance. BMJ. 2010;341:c6819.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.c6819)
    
4.  Wilson SR, et al. Guidelines for the safe provision of anesthesia in magnetic resonance units 2019. Anesthesia. 2019;74(5):638–50. [https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​anae.​14578](https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.14578).[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.14578)