Congenital Syndromescongenital syndromes and Conditions

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2020

Craig Sims, Dana Weber and Chris Johnson (eds.) A Guide to Pediatric Anesthesia[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4\_13](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19246-4_13)

# 13. Congenital Syndromes and Conditions

Prani Shrivastava[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor1)   and Dana Weber[1](#Aff4)  [](#ContactOfAuthor2)  

(1)

Department of Anaesthesia and Pain Management, Perth Children’s Hospital, Nedlands, WA, Australia

Prani Shrivastava (Corresponding author)

Email: [Prani.Shrivastava@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:Prani.Shrivastava@health.wa.gov.au)

Dana Weber

Email: [dana.weber@health.wa.gov.au](mailto:dana.weber@health.wa.gov.au)

### Keywords

Anesthesia for Robin sequenceTrisomy 21 anesthesiaAnesthesia children achondroplasiaCervical spine and anesthesia of childrenAirway obstruction, infant

## 13.1 Robin Sequence

Robin sequence (formerly Pierre Robin) is a clinical triad of micrognathia, glossoptosis and airway obstruction often in association with cleft palate. Mandibular hypoplasia in the first trimester causes the tongue to be in a superior position, preventing midline fusion of the palatal shelves. Robin sequence may occur alone or in association with many syndromes, most often Stickler, velocardiofacial and fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. It occurs in 1 in 8500 births.

The baby’s small jaw causes airway obstruction, sometimes even while the baby is awake. Some are nursed prone to help the tongue fall away from the back of the pharynx, and occasionally they need tracheostomy soon after birth. The jaw grows along with the baby, and eventually the amount of space within the oral cavity is sufficient to avoid airway obstruction. Other organ systems may be affected either from associated syndromes or secondary to chronic upper airway obstruction. However, the main problem for anesthesia is the airway and difficulty with intubation during infancy and early childhood.

### Note

It’s Robin sequence because a single event, mandibular hypoplasia, sets off a sequence causing the other signs. A syndrome has multiple, independent anomalies.

### 13.1.1 Anesthetic Implications

Anesthesia may be required either during the neonatal period for intubation or tracheostomy, or during infancy for cleft palate repair or mandibular advancement. The mid face and mandible grow in the first years of life, and so by primary school age the mandibular profile may be near normal with an improved airway.

The most important aspect of airway assessment is jaw size—the smaller it is, the more difficult airway management will be. Having to nurse the child prone or use a nasal airway even while awake are indicators of more severe forms. The LMA reliably provides a clear airway as the obstruction is at the level of the oropharynx and this is bypassed by the LMA. Anesthesia management therefore usually involves inhalational induction and intubation aided with a videolaryngoscope. A scope with a curved, hyperangulated blade would be best (see Chap. [4](467929_2_En_4_Chapter.xhtml), Sect. [4.​12.​3](467929_2_En_4_Chapter.xhtml#Sec59)). Another technique is to use an LMA used as a conduit for fiber optic intubation. Some neonates with severe Robin sequence needing tracheostomy have the airway topicalized and the LMA inserted awake.

### Keypoint

The small jaw size in Robin sequence is the key. It prevents the tongue fitting within the oral cavity, causing airway obstruction and preventing the tongue being compressed enough to visualize the larynx at intubation. As the jaw grows, the airway improves.

## 13.2 Achondroplasia

Achondroplasia is the commonest cause of dwarfism. Most cases are spontaneous, with autosomal dominant inheritance of a mutation of a fibroblast growth factor receptor. The features of achondroplasia are described in Table [13.1](#Tab1).

Table 13.1

Features associated with achondroplasia

| 
Organ system | Feature

 |
| --- | --- |
| 

Appearance | Short stature, short arms and legs with relatively long trunk

Macrocephaly and frontal bossing

May develop scoliosis

 |
| 

CNS | Tendency to develop hydrocephalus, foramen magnum stenosis and craniocervical cord compression (risk factor for sudden death during infancy)

 |
| 

Airway | Midface hypoplasia

Choanal atresia

High arched palate, macroglossia

High incidence of obstructive sleep apnea

Dental malocclusion, crowding

 |
| 

CVS | May develop pulmonary hypertension if severe untreated OSD or scoliosis

 |

### 13.2.1 Anesthetic Implications

Airway considerations include a potentially awkward mask fit and bag-mask ventilation, and restriction of cervical spine movement. Management of the airway in most children with achondroplasia however, is straightforward. Positioning for laryngoscopy may require planning due to the presence of hydrocephalus, foramen magnum stenosis or craniocervical cord compression. Intubation using a videolaryngoscope reduces neck movement. The size of the ETT may be smaller than predicted by an age-based formula. Planning for post-operative observation or ventilation may be necessary depending on the presence of obstructive sleep apnea or neurological problems.

### Tip

Children with achondroplasia appear small but are developmentally normal—it is a frequent trap to treat them as a younger child.

## 13.3 Trisomy 21 (Down Syndrome)

Trisomy 21 is the most common chromosomal syndrome, occurring in 1 in 800 live births. Several different mechanisms can result in three copies of chromosome 21, so phenotypic expression is variable. Approximately 50% of pregnancies with Trisomy 21 are reported to spontaneously terminate. Risk factors include increasing parental (maternal and paternal) age. Antenatal screening with the offer of elective termination in high risk pregnancies has reduced the incidence.

### 13.3.1 Anesthetic Implications

The many features that may be present are listed in Table [13.2](#Tab2). In practice, atlantoaxial instability, obstructive sleep apnea and cardiac defects have the greatest implications for anesthesia. Despite their many airway changes, intubation is usually not difficult.

Table 13.2

Features of Trisomy 21 patients

| 
Organ system | Feature

 |
| --- | --- |
| 

Appearance | Characteristic facies

Brachycephaly, flat occiput

Upslanting palpebral fissures

Brushfield spots on iris

Short hands with a single, Simian crease

 |
| 

CNS | Variable developmental delay, frequently social & friendly

Atlantoaxial instability (approximately 15%, symptomatic in 2%)

Cataracts, strabismus, refractive errors

 |
| 

Airway | Macroglossia (relative to midface hypoplasia)

Micrognathia

Subglottic stenosis in 10% (may require a smaller ETT than predicted)

High incidence of obstructive sleep disorder

Frequent respiratory tract infections

 |
| 

CVS | High incidence heart disease, classically endocardial cushion defects (atrioventricular canal—VSD + ASD), PDA, Tetralogy of Fallot

Cor pulmonale/pulmonary hypertension if severe, untreated heart disease or airway obstruction

Venous hypoplasia and difficult veins

 |
| 

Hematological | Prone to myeloproliferative disorders (Acute Myeloid leukemia)

Immunosuppression

 |
| 

GIT | Hirschsprung’s disease, duodenal atresia

 |

### 13.3.2 The Cervical Spine and Anesthesia

Craniocervical abnormalities are common in Trisomy 21 (approximately 1 in 5). Abnormalities include atlanto-axial & atlanto-occipital instability, lax transverse ligaments between C1 and C2, and hypoplasia of the occipital condyles & the posterior arch of C1. While most children have uneventful anesthesia, there are case reports of adverse neurological outcomes after surgery including rare cases of cervical cord compression. Of concern are reports of neurological injury associated with upper respiratory tract infections either spontaneously or during the perioperative period.

The signs and symptoms that suggest a craniocervical abnormality with cord compression are listed in Table [13.3](#Tab3). The parents of these children are generally very knowledgeable about Trisomy 21 and will know if there are any concerns about their child’s neck. Nevertheless, if any of these indicators are present, elective surgery should be deferred until the cervical spine has been evaluated. Otherwise, consideration should be given to whether the patient is likely to be a difficult intubation or if surgical positioning will require an abnormal neck position.

Table 13.3

Signs and symptoms that suggest a craniocervical abnormality with cord compression in children with Trisomy 21

| 
Cord compression signs and symptoms

 |
| --- |
| 

History | Refusal to participate in usual activities, refusal to turn the head due to pain or stiffness, increasing fatigability

Dizziness or syncope (vertebral artery kinking or stretching)

Deterioration of gait

Loss of fine motor skills (clumsiness)

Bladder or bowel dysfunction

Altered sensation in hands or feet

 |
| 

Examination | Altered head & neck movement (flexion, extension, rotation), torticollis

Abnormal gait

Long tract neurological signs in legs

 |

In practice, x-rays are infrequently ordered in the asymptomatic child before anesthesia, and instead the head and neck are kept in a neutral position. The American Academy of Pediatrics states routine radiographs are not recommended in asymptomatic children at any age. Cervical radiographs are inaccurate before age of 3 years due to lack of vertebral mineralisation as well as having a low predictive value for risk of developing atlanto-axial instability. Furthermore, the interpretation of plain films is not straightforward. The problems include lack of patient co-operation for successful imaging, lack of ossification, and debate about the upper limit of normal for the anterior atlanto-dental interval (often quoted as 4.5 mm). Plain films only assess passive and not active flexion of the cervical spine. If the films are abnormal, either CT with sagittal reconstructions or MRI is performed to show the abnormalities. If previous films were abnormal, repeat radiography is justified, particularly if ossification was incomplete at the time of the original films.

The greatest subluxation occurs during neck flexion. However, both laryngoscopy (which involves extension & lifting of the skull on C1) and rotary subluxation during surgical positioning have been implicated in adverse outcomes. The LMA secures the airway with reduced head & neck movement compared to intubation. Videolaryngoscopy also reduces movement compared to direct laryngoscopy. Changes to surgical positioning such as rotating the table instead of the patient, or avoiding use of a shoulder roll during tonsillectomy reduce head and neck movement. Wake-up tests for patients requiring prolonged sedation in ICU have been suggested.

### 13.3.3 Obstructive Sleep Disorder

Many children with Trisomy 21 undergo tonsillectomy to treat OSD. They are considered at risk of postoperative airway obstruction, particularly when young and small.

### 13.3.4 Cardiac Defects

About 50% of children with Trisomy 21 have congenital heart disease. They are usually screened at birth and correctional surgery performed if required. Detection of a previously undiagnosed murmur would be an indication for postponement of anesthesia and referral to a cardiologist.

### Keypoint

Consider imaging and neurological referral if the patient has neurological symptoms, previous abnormal radiology without follow-up, or surgery requiring unusual positioning of the neck.

### 13.3.5 Summary

Although children with Trisomy 21 have many changes to the various organ systems including the airway, they are usually reasonably straightforward to manage. Apart from taking care with their neck, intubation is usually not difficult. From a practical point of view however, they often have difficult veins and are anxious at induction. As they grow older, managing their behavior at induction in a stress-free manner can become a major challenge.

## Review Questions

1.  1.
    
    Robin Sequence is associated with mandibular hypoplasia. Why does this cause airway obstruction and difficulty with intubation?
    
2.  2.
    
    A 7 year old child with Trisomy 21 presents for tonsillectomy. He has no neck symptoms.
    
    1.  (a)
        
        Why is he at risk of neurological problems with anesthesia and surgery?
        
    2.  (b)
        
        Would you request cervical spine X-rays before anesthesia?
        
    3.  (c)
        
        What precautions would you take to minimize the risk of neurological sequelae?
        
    

### Further Reading

1.  Bertolizio G, Saint-Martin C, et al. Cervical instability in patients with Trisomy 21: the eternal gamble. Focused review. Pediatr Anesth. 2018;28:1–4.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13481)
    
2.  Bull MJ, Committee on Genetics. Health supervision for children with Down syndrome. Pediatrics. 2011;128:393–405. A comprehensive review of the changes associated with Trisomy 21 at different ages.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2011-1605)
    
3.  Cladis F, Kumar A, et al. Pierre Robin sequence: a perioperative review. Anesth Analg. 2014;119:400–12.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000000301)
    
4.  Hobson-Rohrer WL, Samson-Fang L. Down syndrome. Pediatr Rev. 2013;34:573–6.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.34-12-573)
    
5.  Horton W, Hall J, Hecht J. Achondroplasia. Lancet. 2007;370:162–72.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736\(07\)61090-3)
    
6.  Hunter A, et al. Medical complications of achondroplasia: a multicenter patient review. J Med Genet. 1998;35:705–12.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.35.9.705)
    
7.  McKay DR. Controversies in the diagnosis and management of the Robin sequence. J Craniofac Surg. 2011;22:415–20.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182074799)
    
8.  Raj D, Luginbuehl I. Managing the difficult airway in the syndromic child. Contin Educ Anaesth Crit Care Pain. 2015;15:7–13.[Crossref](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mku004)