Copyright Page 

This edition first published in 2023  
© 2023 John Wiley & Sons Ltd

_Edition History_  
John Wiley & Sons, Inc (3e, 2015); Blackwell Publishing Ltd (2e, 2010), (1e, 2004).

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from this title is available at [http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions](http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions).

The right of Dean B. Andropoulos, Emad B. Mossad, and Erin A. Gottlieb to be identified as the authors of the editorial material in this work has been asserted in accordance with the law.

_Registered Offices_  
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA  
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK

For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley products visit us at [www.wiley.com](http://www.wiley.com).

Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print‐on‐demand. Some content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.

Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.

_Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty_  
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and discussion only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting scientific method, diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives, written sales materials or promotional statements for this work. The fact that an organization, website, or product is referred to in this work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher and authors endorse the information or services the organization, website, or product may provide or recommendations it may make. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a specialist where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.

_Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data_

Names: Andropoulos, Dean B., editor. | Mossad, Emad B., editor. | Gottlieb, Erin A., 1973– editor.  
Title: Anesthesia for congenital heart disease / editor in chief, Dean B.  Andropoulos; editors, Emad B. Mossad, Erin A. Gottlieb.  
Description: Fourth edition. | Hoboken, NJ : Wiley, 2023. | Includes  bibliographical references and index.  
Identifiers: LCCN 2022027263 (print) | LCCN 2022027264 (ebook) |  ISBN 9781119791652 (hardback) | ISBN 9781119791676 (adobe pdf) |  ISBN 9781119793083 (epub)  
Subjects: MESH: Heart Defects, Congenital—surgery | Child |  Anesthesia—methods | Infant  
Classification: LCC RD598 (print) | LCC RD598 (ebook) | NLM WS 295 | DDC  617.9/6741—dc23/eng/20220801  
LC record available at [https://lccn.loc.gov/2022027263](https://lccn.loc.gov/2022027263)  
LC ebook record available at [https://lccn.loc.gov/2022027264](https://lccn.loc.gov/2022027264)

Cover Design: Wiley  
Cover Images: Courtesy of Dean B. Andropoulos