<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Anaphylaxis After Antibiotics in PACU</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-3-031-24396-7_2"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">S. T. Verghese<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Anesthesia STAT!  Acute Pediatric Emergencies in PACU</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_2">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_2</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">Anaphylaxis After Antibiotics in PACU</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Giuliana Geng-Ramos</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Children’s National Hospital, The George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Giuliana Geng-Ramos</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:ggengramos@childrensnational.org">ggengramos@childrensnational.org</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Anaphylaxis</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Hypersensitivity</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Pediatric</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Perioperative</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Shock</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle3" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Objectives</div><div class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par2"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par3">Define anaphylaxis and its clinical manifestations.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par4">Describe the pathophysiology of anaphylaxis.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par5">Recognize the symptoms and triggers of anaphylaxis.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par6">Describe the management of anaphylaxis.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par7">Describe how to prevent anaphylaxis in a patient with history of anaphylaxis.</p></li></ul></div></div></div><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">1 </span>Case <span id="ITerm1">Presentation</span></h2><div class="Para" id="Par8"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">A 5-year-old female with past medical history of asthma presents for hand exploration following a dog bite injury. After an uneventful surgery, she is transported to the postanesthesia care unit (PACU). Given the extensity of her wound, the surgeon orders antibiotics to be administered postoperatively. Intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanate was administered slowly. Ten minutes later, the patient is noted to have swelling of her face and tongue, and urticaria. Her oxygen saturation decreases, and wheezing is audible upon auscultation.</em><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkNone"><li><p class="Para" id="Par9">What is your differential diagnosis for this patient?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par10">What is your immediate next step?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par11"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">You provide supplemental oxygen using a non-rebreather face mask at 10 liters per minute. Oxygen saturation</em> <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">via</em> <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">pulse oximetry remains in the 80s. The patient becomes hypotensive with blood pressure 42/20; tachycardia ensues. You place her in recumbent position with lower extremities elevated to maximize perfusion of vital organs. The patient becomes weak and loses consciousness.</em><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkNone"><li><p class="Para" id="Par12">What is your next intervention?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par13">How will you manage the low oxygen saturation? Will you intubate?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par14">What is at the top of your differential diagnosis? How do you proceed?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par15"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Anaphylaxis is suspected. You call for help and intubate the patient. The waveform on capnography reveals a sawtooth slope and carbon dioxide value of 74.</em><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkNone"><li><p class="Para" id="Par16">What is anaphylaxis and how common is it?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par17">Why is the incidence of anaphylaxis less common in children compared to adults?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par18">What is the pathophysiology of anaphylaxis?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par19">What are the clinical manifestations of anaphylaxis?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par20">Does the patient’s asthma history place her at risk for anaphylaxis?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par21">What are the associated risk factors?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par22">Identify the most common causes of anaphylaxis in the perioperative period.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par23">How do you diagnose anaphylaxis?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par24">How do you treat anaphylaxis?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par25">What interventions are applied if the patient remains hypotensive?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par26">How will you monitor this patient in PACU?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par27"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The child is stable and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). You update her parents about her condition and prognosis. The parents are shocked to hear that this unexpected reaction has occurred, since their child has had antibiotics in the past without any problems. They want to know why she needed to be intubated and how long she will have to stay in the hospital.</em><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkNone"><li><p class="Para" id="Par28">How do you manage the airway during anaphylaxis?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par29">How long should the patient be observed?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par30">What is the mortality rate of anaphylaxis?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par31"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Her parents are grateful after they see she remains stable in the ICU after this unusual event. They request guidance on what they can do to prevent this from happening again.</em><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkNone"><li><p class="Para" id="Par32">What can be done to prevent anaphylaxis?</p></li></ul></div></div></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2 </span>Discussion</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.1 </span>What Is Anaphylaxis and How Common Is It?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par33"><span id="ITerm2">Anaphylaxis</span> is an unanticipated severe, life-threatening generalized or systemic hypersensitivity reaction after exposure to an allergen which manifests as respiratory and cardiovascular compromise [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. Perioperative <span id="ITerm3">anaphylaxis</span> is relatively uncommon with an incidence of 1 in 37,000 pediatric anesthetics, which is less than the estimated <span id="ITerm4">incidence</span> of 1 in 10,000 to 20,000 anesthetics in adults [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>]. However, the exact prevalence is unclear as the incidence of perioperative anaphylaxis in children is not comprehensively reported worldwide [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.2 </span>Why Is the Incidence of Anaphylaxis Less Common in Children Compared to Adults?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par34">The rate of perioperative <span id="ITerm5">anaphylaxis</span> in children is about one quarter of that in adults. The lower incidence rate may be influenced by the type of procedures children undergo as well as the differing anesthetic techniques used in children compared to adults. Hospital-wide efforts to increase awareness and reduce exposure to known triggers, such as latex, have reduced the rate of perioperative anaphylaxis. Children may also be less sensitized to allergens and less exposed to allergens in the perioperative period as compared to adults. Neuromuscular blocking agents and antibiotics are not used as frequently during a general anesthetic in children compared to <span id="ITerm6">adults</span>. Furthermore, a study found 14% of children received only sevoflurane as their anesthetic induction and maintenance, which is a low anaphylaxis-risk anesthetic [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec5"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.3 </span>What Is the Pathophysiology of Anaphylaxis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par35">After <span id="ITerm7">exposure</span> to an allergen, there is sudden release of substances and mediators from mast cells and basophils into circulation. Allergens can trigger anaphylaxis via IgE-dependent mechanisms, known as allergic anaphylaxis, or direct mast cell activation known as nonallergic anaphylaxis or anaphylactoid reaction [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. IgE-dependent mechanism involves an initial sensitizing exposure after which IgE antibodies are produced and bind to receptors on mast cells and basophils. Upon subsequent exposure to the same or chemically similar antigen, the IgE antibodies bind the allergen forming an antigen-antibody complex that induces basophil and mast cell degranulation. Nonallergic anaphylaxis does not necessitate prior sensitization. Regardless of the triggering mechanism, both result in release of mediators including histamine, tryptase, and inflammatory leukotrienes and prostaglandins leading to immediate anaphylaxis symptoms [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. Mast cells then release additional chemokines that recruit and activate additional inflammatory cells [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec6"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.4 </span>What Are the Clinical Manifestations of Anaphylaxis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par36">Symptoms <span id="ITerm8">typically</span> occur shortly after exposure to an allergen and progress rapidly. The release of vasoactive mediators results in increased capillary permeability and peripheral vasodilation and extravasation of intravascular fluid into the extracellular fluid space, leading to hypovolemic shock. Organs involved include the skin, mucous membranes, cardiovascular system, respiratory system, and gastrointestinal tract [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>]. In the pediatric population, severe anaphylaxis most often presents with bronchospasm or high airway pressure [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.5 </span>Clinical Manifestations of Anaphylaxis by Organ System [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>]<span id="ITerm9"/></h3><div class="Para" id="Par37"><div class="Table" id="Taba"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Affected organ system</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Clinical manifestation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Skin</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pruritis, flushing, urticaria, angioedema</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Eyes</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Conjunctivitis</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Respiratory</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Upper: rhinitis, laryngeal edema</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Lower: bronchoconstriction, wheezing, dyspnea, cyanosis</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Intestinal tract</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cardiovascular</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tachycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias, shock</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Renal</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Decreased urine output</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hematologic</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par38">Children on beta-blocker therapy can have an atypical presentation of anaphylaxis characterized by hypotension and bradycardia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>]. The clinical severity of anaphylaxis is graded using clinical manifestations and can be used to guide clinical care.<span id="ITerm10"/></p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6 </span>Anaphylaxis Grading Adapted from Ring and Messmer Grading Scale [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>]</h3><div class="Para" id="Par39"><div class="Table" id="Tabb"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/><col class="tcol4 align-left"/><col class="tcol5 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th rowspan="2" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Grade</p></th><th colspan="4" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Clinical manifestations based on organ system</p></th></tr><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cutaneous-mucous</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Gastrointestinal tract</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Respiratory system</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cardiovascular system</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pruritis, erythema, ±<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">angioedema</em></p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pruritis, erythema, ±angioedema</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Nausea, abdominal cramps</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Dyspnea, cough, rhinorrhea</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypotension tachycardia or bradycardia, ±cardiac dysrhythmia</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pruritis, erythema, ±angioedema</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Emesis, diarrhea</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Wheezing, cyanosis, laryngeal edema</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cardiovascular collapse/shock</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pruritis, erythema, ±angioedema</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Emesis, diarrhea</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Respiratory arrest</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cardiac arrest</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec9"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.7 </span>Does the Patient’s Asthma History Place Her at Risk for Anaphylaxis? What Are the Associated Risk Factors?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par40">There are several <span id="ITerm11">risk factors</span> found in children who develop perioperative anaphylaxis. A history of <span id="ITerm12">asthma</span>, atopy, food allergies, undergoing multiple operations, and family history of atopy are risk factors for anaphylaxis in children. While there is no sex difference found in children, anaphylaxis is more common in adult females compared to male counterparts [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec10"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.8 </span>Identify the Most Common Causes of Anaphylaxis in the Perioperative Period</h3><p class="Para" id="Par41">Antibiotics account for the highest incidence of perioperative <span id="ITerm13">anaphylaxis</span>, of which cephalosporins, followed by penicillins, have been recognized as the most frequently reported culprits [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. <span id="ITerm14">Cephalosporins</span> are commonly used in surgical prophylaxis creating a challenge for the anesthesiologist caring for a child with reported penicillin or cephalosporin allergy. Penicillins and cephalosporins share a beta-lactam ring that when attached to similar R1 side chains can result in potential cross-reactivity. Certain cephalosporins, such as cephazolin, contain a unique side chain structure that does not react with penicillins, while ampicillin, cefaclor, and cephalexin share an R1 group side chain. Data in perioperative settings are limited but suggest very low incidence of anaphylaxis to cephazolin in patients with penicillin allergy; there is no clear evidence of an increased risk of anaphylaxis in a cefazolin-naïve, penicillin-allergic patients [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par42">Neuromuscular blocking agents (NMBA<span id="ITerm15"/>) were previously identified as the most common cause of anaphylaxis in the perioperative period and are now second to antibiotics [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. Succinylcholine has the highest rate of anaphylaxis, followed by rocuronium and atracurium [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>]. It’s important to note that because of the low number of cases reported in children, it is not possible to make definitive conclusions concerning risk rates with different drugs, and this varies among countries. However, there appears to be a proportionate number of cases of atracurium and succinylcholine exposures [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par43">Many common over-the-counter medications and daily-use cosmetics and products contain the same allergenic epitopes found in NMBA that could lead to sensitization; therefore a prior exposure to an <span id="ITerm16">NMBA</span> is not required to develop anaphylaxis [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par44"><span id="ITerm17">Sugammadex</span>, widely used worldwide, is a cyclodextrin compound used for the reversal of neuromuscular blocking agents such as rocuronium and vecuronium. Sugammadex is generally thought to be a safe and well-tolerated drug; however, confirmed cases of anaphylaxis to sugammadex have been recently reported. Little is known about the mechanism of sugammadex-induced anaphylaxis as there is a lack of IgE-specific antibodies, and skin prick testing is still in development. In reported cases, none of the patients had prior exposure to sugammadex, suggesting cross-reactivity between sugammadex and another substance. <span id="ITerm18">Cyclodextrins</span> are present in various foods, which may partly explain sensitization and cross-reaction with sugammadex. [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]</p><p class="Para" id="Par45"><span id="ITerm19">Chlorhexidine</span> is an emerging cause of anaphylaxis when applied to mucous membranes or the skin. It can also occur when the skin or mucus membrane comes in contact with it from a chlorhexidine-impregnated device. When applied to mucous membranes or the skin, chlorhexidine may produce a delayed reaction; conversely, when inserted as part of a chlorhexidine-impregnated device, it can lead to rapid and severe anaphylaxis [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par46"><span id="ITerm20">Latex</span> has historically been cited as a prominent trigger for anaphylaxis in the perioperative period. Exposure to latex has reduced significantly over recent years, drastically decreasing sensitization and, in turn, reducing the incidence of latex-induced anaphylaxis [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>]. Children with spina bifida are at highest risk for anaphylaxis from latex exposure with a reported prevalence as high as 70% [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">12</a></span>]. Children with known allergies to tropical fruits, such as papaya, banana, kiwi, and avocado, are at risk for allergic reaction to latex due to cross-reactivity [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec11"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.9 </span>What Is the Differential Diagnosis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par47">The diagnosis of anaphylaxis may be challenging when only a few or nonspecific symptoms are present. The <span id="ITerm21">differential diagnosis</span> includes hypovolemia, sepsis, embolism, vasovagal reaction, asthma, tension pneumothorax, aspiration, or foreign body in the airway [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec12"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.10 </span>How Do You Diagnose Anaphylaxis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par48">The <span id="ITerm22">initial diagnosis</span> is clinical, based on the history and physical examination. Serologic and skin testing can provide confirmation of the diagnosis. Tryptase is a neutral protease stored in mast cells that is released during anaphylactic reactions. An increased plasma tryptase level within 1–2 h of suspected reaction confirms mast cell activation and mediator release occurrence, signaling an immune-mediated mechanism. It does not differentiate between anaphylaxis and anaphylactoid reactions [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>]. Skin testing performed by prick and intradermal techniques 4–6 weeks after an anaphylaxis episode can help identify the offending antigen. [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>]</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec13"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.11 </span>How Do You Treat Anaphylaxis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par49"><span id="ITerm23">Anaphylaxis</span> must be recognized and treated immediately. Management consists of immediate withdrawal of suspected triggers, interrupting the effects of the released vasoactive and inflammatory mediators, and averting further mediator release. Resuscitation involves reversing airway obstruction and increasing intravascular volume and tone, for which epinephrine is the drug of choice since its alpha-1 effect induces vasoconstriction and beta-2 effect causes relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle. Early administration of epinephrine is critical. If the child is in cardiac arrest, the arrest dose of 10 mcg/kg IV should be given. For hypotension or impending cardiac arrest, give epinephrine 1–10 mcg/kg IV, and this can be repeated every 1–2 min as needed if unresponsive. An epinephrine infusion of 0.02–0.2 μg/kg/min may be necessary for refractory hypotension. Intravascular depletion is treated with multiple boluses of 20 mL/kg of intravenous crystalloid, such as normal saline, given rapidly. The child should be placed on 100% oxygen to increase oxygen delivery. In case of severe airway obstruction, early <span id="ITerm24">intubation</span> by a skilled practitioner should be performed. Inhaled bronchodilators can be given for treatment of bronchospasm. To decrease the histamine-mediated effects, antihistamines such as diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg and ranitidine 1 mg/kg are given. Corticosteroids should be administered to help decrease mediator release, decrease airway swelling, and prevent recurrence of symptoms [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>].</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec14"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3 </span>Management of <span id="ITerm25">Anaphylaxis</span></h2><div class="Para" id="Par50"><div class="Table" id="Tabc"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Organ system</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Treatment</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Effect</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Airway</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">100% oxygen</p><p class="SimplePara">Early intubation if severe airway obstruction</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Increase oxygen delivery</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Respiratory</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Albuterol and ipratropium bromide nebulization</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Reverse bronchoconstriction</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Circulation</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Epinephrine 1–10 mcg/kg bolus PRN</p><p class="SimplePara">Epinephrine infusion 0.02–0.2 mcg/kg/min</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Increase intravascular tone</p><p class="SimplePara">Bronchial smooth muscle relaxation</p><p class="SimplePara">Decrease mediator release</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">IV crystalloid 20 mL/kg boluses</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Restore intravascular volume</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cellular cutaneous</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg IV</p><p class="SimplePara">Ranitidine 1 mg/kg IV</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Decrease effects of histamine</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Corticosteroids</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Decrease mediator release</p><p class="SimplePara">Decrease airway swelling</p><p class="SimplePara">Prevent recurrence</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec15"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3.1 </span>What Interventions Are Applied if the Patient Remains Hypotensive?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par51">For resistant <span id="ITerm26">hypotension</span>, consider administering norepinephrine or vasopressin infusions. The cause for resistant hypotension may be due to desensitization of adrenergic receptors for which vasopressin may be useful since it has vasoactive effects mediated by non-adrenergic vascular V<sup>1</sup> receptors. It’s important to note that vasopressin administered alone in the early course of anaphylaxis may be detrimental and should be reserved for patients experiencing anaphylaxis refractory to epinephrine or norepinephrine [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>]. Patients who are taking beta-blocker therapy, alone or in combination with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, may be resistant to standard treatment and have severe anaphylaxis. If a patient taking beta-blockers is refractory to epinephrine, isoprenaline and glucagon should be considered [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. Glucagon has inotropic and chronotropic effects that are not mediated through beta-receptors [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3.2 </span>How Will You Monitor This Patient in PACU?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par52"><span id="ITerm27">Continuous noninvasive monitoring</span><span id="ITerm28"/> of blood pressure, heart rate, and oxygenation via pulse oximetry should be performed. An intra-arterial catheter should be placed for arterial pressure monitoring in children receiving vasoactive infusions. A urinary catheter should be placed to monitor urine output. Central venous pressure <span id="ITerm29">monitor</span> should be placed in children with fluid and catecholamine-resistant shock [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec17"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3.3 </span>How Do You Manage the Airway During Anaphylaxis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par53">The initial <span id="ITerm30">management</span> of anaphylaxis involves assessment of the patient’s airway. If the airway is not edematous, supplemental oxygen can be administered via non-rebreather oxygen. Severe anaphylaxis can lead to angioedema and bronchospasm, which is the most common presenting symptom in children [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>]. Anaphylaxis can result in significant edema of the tongue and oropharyngeal tissues, leading to rapid airway compromise and difficult intubation. Intubation should be performed urgently if stridor or respiratory distress is present.</p><p class="Para" id="Par54">If bronchospasm is present, albuterol and ipratropium bromide nebulizers should be administered to allow bronchial smooth muscle relaxation. Administration of corticosteroids should be considered to reduce airway edema and prevent late and delayed symptoms. Hydrocortisone is the preferred steroid because of its fast onset. Because airway swelling and inflammation may continue for 24 h, extubation should be delayed [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec18"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3.4 </span>How Long Should the Patient Be Observed?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par55">Following stabilization, the patient should be <span id="ITerm31">observed</span> in the intensive care unit because airway swelling and inflammation may persist or the patient may exhibit a biphasic response [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>]. Biphasic responses involve an initial reaction meeting criteria for anaphylaxis, followed by a period of 1 h or more without symptoms, and subsequent return of symptoms meeting criteria for anaphylaxis without further exposure to the antigen. The time period between the resolution of the first reaction and initiation of biphasic response ranges from 1 h to up to 48 h [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>]. The incidence of biphasic reactions in pediatric patients is 6% and is associated with delayed administration of epinephrine. Given that biphasic reactions occur with significant frequency, a 24-h period of observation is recommended [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">16</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec19"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3.5 </span>What Is the Mortality Rate of Anaphylaxis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par56"><span id="ITerm32">Mortality</span> is relatively rare but has occurred [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. The observed mortality rate is 3.8% and is associated with increased age, increased ASA physical status, morbid obesity, coronary artery disease, and concomitant use of beta-blocker and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par57">A case report described the occurrence of <span id="ITerm33">atypical stress-induced cardiomyopathy</span> associated with cephalosporin-induced anaphylaxis in a young adult. <span id="ITerm34">Stress-induced cardiomyopathy</span> may be triggered by anaphylaxis via two mechanisms. Simultaneous multivessel coronary artery spasms by anaphylactic mediators may initiate stress-induced cardiomyopathy. Secondly, excessive rise of systemic catecholamines activates cardiac catecholamine receptors, precipitating stress-induced cardiomyopathy. Anaphylaxis leads to compensatory release of catecholamines. This, combined with administration of catecholamines for hemodynamic support in anaphylactic shock, may provoke stress-induced cardiomyopathy. Although life-threatening, the prognosis of stress-induced cardiomyopathy is generally favorable [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">17</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec20"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3.6 </span>What Can Be Done to Prevent Anaphylaxis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par58">The most effective measure to prevent <span id="ITerm35">anaphylaxis</span> is to identify and avoid the known triggering agent. Children with suspected allergic reaction should be referred to an allergy testing center, 4–6 weeks after symptom resolution for a diagnostic workup. Any drug with a high clinical suspicion of causing anaphylaxis but negative testing should be avoided [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. Premedication with antihistamines or corticosteroids has little benefit and may blunt the early signs of anaphylaxis leading to delay in recognition and management [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>]. Children with documented anaphylaxis to a medication should be referred for a medical alert bracelet to alert medical professionals should the child be found unconscious or unaccompanied by a guardian [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>].</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec21"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">4 </span>Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par59">Although perioperative anaphylaxis is relatively rare in children, most drugs used in the perioperative setting can lead to anaphylaxis. Perioperative anaphylaxis is most commonly caused by antibiotics and neuromuscular blocking agents, and prior exposure to the drug is not often necessary. The most common presenting symptom of anaphylaxis in children is bronchospasm. Management involves early recognition, removal of the triggering agent, administration of epinephrine, and aggressive fluid resuscitation. The airway can become edematous quickly; therefore early intubation should be considered if angioedema is observed. Patients should be monitored for refractory anaphylaxis for at least 24 h. Children with suspected anaphylaxis should be referred to a specialized allergy testing center for follow-up to identify the causative agent and prevent recurrence in the future. Medical alert bracelets are imperative to identify life-threatening agents that should be avoided during medical emergencies.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">1.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Johansson SG, Bieber T, Dahl R, et al. Revised nomenclature for allergy for global use: report of the Nomenclature Review Committee of the World Allergy Organization, October 2003. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2004;113(5):832–6. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2003.12.591"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jaci.​2003.​12.​591</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2003.12.591"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15131563"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">2.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Stepanovic B, Sommerfield D, Lucas M, von Ungern-Sternberg BS. An update on allergy and anaphylaxis in pediatric anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth. 2019;29(9):892–900. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13703"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​13703</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13703"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31379063"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">3.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Wakimoto M, Miller R, Kim SS, et al. Perioperative anaphylaxis in children: a report from the wake-up safe collaborative. Paediatr Anaesth. 2021;31(2):205–12. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14063"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​14063</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14063"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33141983"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">4.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Harper NJN, Cook TM, Garcez T, et al. Anaesthesia, surgery, and life-threatening allergic reactions: management and outcomes in the 6th National Audit Project (NAP6). Br J Anaesth. 2018;121(1):172–88. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2018.04.015"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​bja.​2018.​04.​015</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bja.2018.04.015"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29935569"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">5.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Dewachter P, et al. Anaphylaxis and anesthesia: controversies and new insights. Anesthesiology. 2009;111(5):1141–50.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181bbd443"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19858877"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">6.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Hepner DL, Castells MC. Anaphylaxis during the perioperative period. Anesth Analg. 2003;97(5):1381–95. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000082993.84883.7D"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1213/​01.​ANE.​0000082993.​84883.​7D</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000082993.84883.7D"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=14570656"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">7.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Momeni M, Brui B, Baele P, Matta A. Anaphylactic shock in a beta-blocked child: usefulness of isoproterenol. Paediatr Anaesth. 2007;17(9):897–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9592.2007.02276.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1460-9592.​2007.​02276.​x</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9592.2007.02276.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=17683411"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">8.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Ring J, Messmer K. Incidence and severity of anaphylactoid reactions to colloid volume substitutes. Lancet. 1977;1(8009):466–9.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(77)91953-5"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=65572"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">9.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Vorobeichik L, et al. Misconceptions surrounding penicillin allergy: implications for anesthesiologists. Anesth Analg. 2018;127(3):642–9.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000003419"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29757781"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">10.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Tacquard C, Collange O, Gomis P, et al. Anaesthetic hypersensitivity reactions in France between 2011 and 2012: the 10th GERAP epidemiologic survey. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2017;61(3):290–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.12855"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​aas.​12855</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.12855"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28164269"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">11.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Takazawa T, et al. Three suspected cases of sugammadex-induced anaphylactic shock. BMC Anesthesiol. 2014;14:92.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2253-14-92"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25349529"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4209027"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">12.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Bernardini R, et al. Prevalence of and risk factors for latex sensitization in patients with spina bifida. J Urol. 1998;160:1775–8.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5347(01)62403-0"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=9783950"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">13.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Thomas M, Crawford I. Best evidence topic report. Glucagon infusion in refractory anaphylactic shock in patients on beta-blockers. Emerg Med J. 2005;22(4):272–3.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1136/emj.2005.023507"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15788828"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1726748"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">14.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Waltzman M. Initial management of shock in children. UpToDate. 2020. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www.uptodate.com/contents/initial-management-of-shock-in-children?search=anaphylaxis%2520urine%2520output&amp;source=search_result&amp;selectedTitle=4~150&amp;usage_type=default&amp;display_rank=4#H23"><span class="RefSource">https://​www.​uptodate.​com/​contents/​initial-management-of-shock-in-children?​search=​anaphylaxis%20​urine%20​output&amp;​source=​search_​result&amp;​selectedTitle=​4~150&amp;​usage_​type=​default&amp;​display_​rank=​4#H23</span></a></span>.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">15.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Lieberman P. Biphasic anaphylactic reactions. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2005;95(3):217–26; quiz 226, 258.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S1081-1206(10)61217-3"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=16200811"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">16.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Lee JM, Greenes DS. Biphasic anaphylactic reactions in pediatrics. Pediatrics. 2000;106(4):762–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.106.4.762"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11015520"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">17.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Suk EH, et al. Stress-induced cardiomyopathy following cephalosporin-induced anaphylactic shock during general anesthesia. Can J Anaesth. 2009;56(6):432–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-009-9083-0"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19322620"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li></ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>