<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Cardiac Arrest After Central Line Placement in a Child</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-3-031-24396-7_5"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">S. T. Verghese<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Anesthesia STAT!  Acute Pediatric Emergencies in PACU</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_5">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_5</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">Cardiac Arrest After Central Line Placement in a Child</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Chinwe Unegbu</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Division of Cardiac Anesthesiology, Children’s National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Chinwe Unegbu</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:cunegbu@childrensnational.org">cunegbu@childrensnational.org</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Cardiac arrest</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Central venous catheter</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Hypotension</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Hypoxemia</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Tension pneumothorax</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Needle decompression</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">1 </span>Case</h2><p class="Para" id="Par2">A 5-year-old boy with Trisomy 21 (<span id="ITerm1">Down syndrome</span>) arrives to the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) after placement of a Broviac central venous catheter (CVC). He was <span id="ITerm2">admitted</span> to the hospital 2 days prior with several weeks of fever, lethargy, and poor po intake. His complete blood count was concerning for leukemia, and he subsequently underwent a lumbar puncture and bone marrow aspiration with confirmation of diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). He requires central venous access for initiation of chemotherapy. He has been NPO since midnight. He has a history of snoring and has developed some sniffles with the onset of fever and lethargy and does not have an appetite.</p><p class="Para" id="Par3">On pre-op examination he is cooperative and able to come to the surgical procedure room for his Broviac placement without any need for premedication. He has some facial petechiae. Parents say that he has not had any epistaxis or bleeding from gums with brushing his teeth.</p><p class="Para" id="Par4">His weight is 18 kg.</p><p class="Para" id="Par5">His labs show Hb/Hct of 8.5/28 and platelets 40 K.</p><p class="Para" id="Par6"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Past Medical History</strong>: Full term, spontaneous vaginal delivery, prenatal diagnosis of Trisomy 21.</p><p class="Para" id="Par7"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Past Surgical History:</strong> Tonsillectomy and Adenoidectomy at age 3 for obstructive sleep apnea.</p><p class="Para" id="Par8"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Medications:</strong> Acetaminophen and Ondansetron.</p><p class="Para" id="Par9"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Vital Signs on Arrival to PACU:</strong> BP 80/40, HR 130, sat 89%, temp 36.3 °C.</p><p class="Para" id="Par10"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Physical Examination:</strong> Agitated, inconsolable, and limited cardiopulmonary <span id="ITerm3">examination</span>.</p><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle3" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Key Questions</div><div class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par11"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par12">What is a Broviac CVC?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par13">What are the broad indications for a CVC?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par14">How does a Broviac catheter differ from the other types of CVCs?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par15">In this patient who is s/p tunneled line insertion, what is your differential diagnosis for hypoxia?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par16">Why is aspiration on your differential diagnosis for hypoxia in this patient?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par17">Why are <span id="ITerm4">airway obstruction</span> and <span id="ITerm5">pulmonary edema</span> on your differential diagnosis?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par18">Any procedure-specific concerns that may be contributing to the clinical picture?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par19">Why are you concerned about a congenital heart defect?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par20"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Case continued</em>: The patient’s oxygen saturations are intermittently decreasing to 70%. BP is 60/40 and HR 160 bpm. CXR is obtained and echo ordered. Attempts to place oxygen mask on the face are difficult and oxygen saturations are still in the range of 70–75%.<span id="ITerm6"/><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par21">If you suspected a <span id="ITerm7">venous air embolism</span>, what would you do?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par22">How could you prevent a <span id="ITerm8">venous air embolism</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par23">How could an inadvertent <span id="ITerm9">arterial puncture</span> lead to this clinical presentation?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par24">If an <span id="ITerm10">arterial puncture</span> was suspected intraoperatively, what should have been done?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par25">Which CVC insertion site is more prone to hematoma formation with accidental <span id="ITerm11">arterial puncture</span>? Which site is more prone to cause airway compromise?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par26">Any late complications that you are concerned about with accidental <span id="ITerm12">arterial puncture</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par27">Could a dysrhythmia account for this clinical picture? Any preventative steps?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par28">Would you order any diagnostic studies in this patient?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par29">What are the expected chest x-ray findings for aspiration, <span id="ITerm13">pulmonary edema</span>, and <span id="ITerm14">pneumothorax</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par30">What are the expected echocardiographic findings for tamponade?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par31"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Case continued</em>: Patient becomes unresponsive. Pulse oximeter is intermittently reading; BP by NIBP reading shows a mean of 30. HR is 170 bpm.<div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par32">What is a tension <span id="ITerm15">pneumothorax</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par33">How do you diagnose a tension <span id="ITerm16">pneumothorax</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par34">What are the chest x-ray findings of tension <span id="ITerm17">pneumothorax</span>?<span id="ITerm18"/></p></li></ul></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par35"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Case continued</em>: No pulse is detected on palpation. Attempts at auscultation reveal no heart sounds. There is no detectable blood pressure, and the patient is minimally responsive. EKG demonstrates normal sinus rhythm with a heart rate in the 70s.</p><div class="Para" id="Par36"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par037">Which PALS algorithm will you use?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par37">If the child is in PEA arrest, what is your next step?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par38">What is considered good-quality <span id="ITerm19">CPR</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par39">What are the reversible causes of PEA arrest that you consider?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par40">What are the interventions for these reversible causes of PEA arrest?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par41">If you are suspecting a tension <span id="ITerm20">pneumothorax</span>, how would you perform a needle decompression?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par42">How does the needle decompression in a pediatric patient differ from an adult patient?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par43">Should the patient be intubated prior to needle decompression?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par44"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Case continued</em>: Needle decompression is performed. BP is 80/40 and HR 100 bpm.<span id="ITerm21"/><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par45">Should a chest tube be inserted following needle decompression?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par46">Any concerns with rapid lung re-expansion?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par47">What are the possible procedural factors which may have contributed to the development of a <span id="ITerm22">pneumothorax</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par48">How would you differentiate a <span id="ITerm23">pneumothorax</span> from a cardiac tamponade?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par49">Any preventative measures to reduce the likelihood of causing a <span id="ITerm24">pneumothorax</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par50">What are the pros and cons of the various CVC access sites?</p></li></ul></div></div></div></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2 </span>Discussion</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.1 </span>What Is a Broviac CVC?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par51">A Broviac <span id="ITerm25">CVC</span> is a tunneled small-bore soft silicone catheter. It has a cuff that provides anchorage into the subcutaneous tract and allows subcutaneous tissues to grow into it. The design of the Broviac catheter and Hickman catheter is similar, and both are tunneled CVCs with the major difference being inner luminal diameter. The Broviac catheter has an inner luminal diameter of 1 mm when compared to Hickman catheter’s inner luminal diameter of 1.6 mm.<span id="ITerm26"/></p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.2 </span>What Are the Broad Indications for a CVC?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par52">A <span id="ITerm27">CVC</span> may be needed to deliver multiple medications including chemotherapeutics, vesicant drugs, and antibiotics. Additional indications include administration of parenteral nutrition and need for repeated blood transfusions.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec5"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.3 </span>How Does a Broviac Catheter Differ from the Other Types of CVCs?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par53">A Broviac catheter is a tunneled CVC. <span id="ITerm28">Tunneled catheters</span> are preferred when intravenous access is needed for a longer duration of time. They have the benefit of having a lower infection rate when compared to non-tunneled catheters [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. Catheters that are non-tunneled are used most frequently in emergency and acute situations primarily because of their simplicity and the ease of insertion. <span id="ITerm29">Non-tunneled catheters</span> are intended for a short duration of use, so these should be removed as soon as possible in order to prevent complications like infections or thrombosis. When compared to tunneled and non-tunneled <span id="ITerm30">catheters,</span> implanted ports are preferred as they have better cosmetic results and less infection risk; however, they take more time and skill to implant.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec6"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.4 </span>In This Patient Who Is S/P Tunneled Line Insertion, What Is Your Differential Diagnosis for <span id="ITerm31">Hypoxia</span>?</h3><div class="Para" id="Par54"><div class="Table" id="Taba"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/></colgroup><tbody><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Airway/respiratory</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Airway obstruction</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pulmonary edema</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><span id="ITerm32">Pneumothorax</span></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Aspiration</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Cardiac</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Myocardial perforation/tamponade</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Arrhythmia</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><span id="ITerm33">Venous air embolism</span></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pulmonary embolism</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Congenital heart defect</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Others</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Arterial puncture</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hemothorax</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.5 </span>Why Is Aspiration on Your Differential Diagnosis for Hypoxia in This Patient?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par55">Although perioperative <span id="ITerm34">aspiration</span><span id="ITerm35"/> is a rare event that occurs more commonly in children undergoing emergency surgery, it should always be a consideration in any patient presenting postoperatively with hypoxia. Aspiration events typically occur peri-induction of anesthesia, but in this case no emesis was noted intraoperatively. Patients with suspected aspiration and respiratory symptoms within 2 h of the <span id="ITerm36">event</span> are more likely to develop respiratory <span id="ITerm37">sequelae</span> and require further respiratory support [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. Symptoms of aspiration include cough, wheezing, low oxygen saturation, and a chest x-ray infiltrate.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6 </span>Why Are <span id="ITerm38">Airway Obstruction</span> and <span id="ITerm39">Pulmonary Edema</span> on Your Differential Diagnosis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par56">This patient has Trisomy 21, and patients with <span id="ITerm40">Down syndrome</span> are prone to <span id="ITerm41">airway obstruction</span> because of micrognathia, a short <span id="ITerm42">neck</span>, hypotonia, and macroglossia. Patients with Down syndrome can also have small nares and a narrower trachea, and there is an increased incidence of subglottic stenosis in this population [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. Sleep-disordered breathing, including upper <span id="ITerm43">airway obstruction</span> and obstructive sleep apnea, is seen in 30–60% of children with Down syndrome. A component of this obstructive sleep apnea is adenotonsillar hypertrophy, but the patient in question is status post tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy.</p><p class="Para" id="Par57">Post-obstructive <span id="ITerm44">pulmonary edema</span> (also known as negative pressure <span id="ITerm45">pulmonary edema</span>) is a well described but infrequent complication of upper <span id="ITerm46">airway obstruction</span> [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>]. It often develops following extubation when subatmospheric pressure is generated in the alveolus and most often occurs in young, muscular, adult male patients who experience acute <span id="ITerm47">airway obstruction</span>. It is less common in neonates and infants because their musculature is not yet fully developed and their chest wall is very compliant, thereby limiting their ability to generate extremely negative intra-alveolar pressure in the presence of <span id="ITerm48">airway obstruction</span> [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>]. Clinical signs of post-obstructive <span id="ITerm49">pulmonary edema</span> include agitation, tachypnea, tachycardia, pink frothy pulmonary secretions, and progressive oxygen desaturation.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec9"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.7 </span>Any Procedure Specific Concerns That May Be Contributing to the Clinical Picture?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par58"><span id="ITerm50"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Pneumothorax</em></span><span id="ITerm51"/> is a potentially serious complication of central line insertion which results from inadvertent puncture of the lung apex. Central venous catheterization, specifically the internal jugular and subclavian sites, is the most common cause of <span id="ITerm52">iatrogenic pneumothorax</span> [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>]. The incidence of central access-related <span id="ITerm53">pneumothorax</span><span id="ITerm54"/> varies not only with access site but also with the presence of underlying risk factors such as lung disease, operator experience, and the setting (elective versus emergency) [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par59"><span id="ITerm55">Pericardial tamponade</span> is another possibility given the presenting symptoms especially with tunneled hemodialysis catheter insertion. Although a rare complication, tamponade results from atrial perforation, which can lead to severe bleeding into the pericardium. Clinical signs and symptoms associated with tamponade include tachycardia, tachypnea, respiratory distress, hypoxemia, narrow pulse pressure, hypotension, and pulsus paradoxus.</p><p class="Para" id="Par60"><span id="ITerm56">Arterial injury</span> due to inadvertent needle puncture of the associated artery instead of the targeted vein (e.g., the femoral artery, carotid artery, or subclavian artery) is another possibility. Hematomas that may form after an inadvertent <span id="ITerm57">arterial puncture</span> can compress associated structures and lead to life-threatening <span id="ITerm58">airway obstruction</span> [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>]. Unrecognized <span id="ITerm59">arterial puncture</span> with subsequent dilation and catheter placement can lead to life-threatening bleeding into the chest, retroperitoneum, or thigh, depending on the access site. Ultrasound use reduces but does not eliminate this risk. Immediate recognition and management of <span id="ITerm60">arterial puncture</span> usually prevent subsequent complications. Late recognition of <span id="ITerm61">arterial catheterization</span> increases the risk of hemorrhagic or thrombotic complications, which may require surgical intervention. Accidental catheterization of the carotid or subclavian artery by a large-bore catheter (>7 Fr) can cause arterial thrombosis, hemorrhage, stroke, pseudoaneurysm, or death [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par61"><span id="ITerm62">Periprocedural arrhythmias</span> are also a consideration and are universally the result of guidewire or catheter placement into the right heart [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. Premature atrial and ventricular contractions as well as ventricular dysrhythmias and bundle branch block are possible complications during central venous access procedures. Their initial presentation would include abnormal rhythm on the electrocardiogram with associated hypotension. Respiratory insufficiency likely would not be the initial presentation.</p><p class="Para" id="Par62"><span id="ITerm63">Venous air embolism</span> is a rare yet potentially lethal complication associated with central venous access. It is often poorly recognized but more common with large-lumen catheters. <span id="ITerm64">Venous air embolisms</span> typically occur at the time of CVC insertion but can also occur during catheter use or at the time of catheter removal [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">12</a></span>]. With a <span id="ITerm65">venous air embolism</span>, air is entrained into the venous system when either a needle or catheter is left open to the atmosphere or by inadvertent injection of air into the vessel. Risk factors for developing a <span id="ITerm66">venous air embolism</span> during catheter insertion include upright positioning, hypovolemia, and spontaneous inhalation during instrumentation. Placement of a patient in Trendelenburg position, if possible, may reduce the risk of air embolization. The effect of venous air embolization depends upon the rate and volume of air introduced into the venous circulation, but the lethal dose for humans has been theorized to be 3–5 mL/kg [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>]. Affected patients can suffer both cardiovascular and pulmonary symptoms including tachyarrhythmias, chest pain, coughing, dyspnea, hypoxemia, respiratory distress, and cardiovascular collapse. This patient became progressively less stable in the recovery room, and the CVC had not been utilized prior to the decompensation making inadvertent air entrainment into the venous circulation unlikely.</p><p class="Para" id="Par63">Lastly, <span id="ITerm67">recurrent laryngeal nerve injuries</span> can occur with CVC insertion and have had an incidence of 1.6%. It is due to accidental trauma or perineural hematoma formation [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>]. This would result in hoarseness and possibly some respiratory distress, but it would not account for the hemodynamic perturbations seen in this patient.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec10"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.8 </span>Why Are You Concerned About a Congenital Heart Defect?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par64"><span id="ITerm68">Congenital heart defects</span><span id="ITerm69"/> occur in approximately 40–50% of children with Trisomy 21. Atrioventricular septal defects (AVSD<span id="ITerm70"/>) have a particular association with this population and children with <span id="ITerm71">Down syndrome</span> account for 70% of <span id="ITerm72">AVSD</span> cases. <span id="ITerm73">Pulmonary vascular disease</span> may also occur in children with trisomy 21 due to an unrepaired cardiac lesion such as an <span id="ITerm74">AVSD</span>. Pulmonary vascular disease can lead to reversal of a left to right shunting through an <span id="ITerm75">AVSD</span> resulting in cyanosis. Pulmonary vascular disease may also occur in the absence of cardiac lesions because of chronic hypoxemia and hypoventilation due to muscle hypotonia and obstructive sleep apnea and is associated with a high perioperative mortality. It should be a consideration in any child with Trisomy 21.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec11"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.9 </span>If You Suspected a <span id="ITerm76">Venous Air Embolism</span>, What Would You Do?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par65">The suspicion for <span id="ITerm77">venous air embolism</span><span id="ITerm78"/> is very low since the patient decompensated post-procedure and the CVC was not being used in the PACU. However, if a <span id="ITerm79">venous air embolism</span> was suspected, positioning the patient in left lateral decubitus with Trendelenburg would in theory help trap the air in the right ventricular apex. Supportive measures such as administration of 100% inspired oxygen concentration could help increase the speed of air resorption. Fluid resuscitation and administration of adrenergic agonists can also aid in hemodynamic support and air resorption [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec12"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.10 </span>How Could You Prevent a <span id="ITerm80">Venous Air Embolism</span>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par66"><span id="ITerm81">Venous air embolism</span> can occur at any time such as during CVC insertion or while the catheter is in place and during catheter removal [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">16</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">17</a></span>]. During catheter insertion, Trendelenburg <span id="ITerm82">positioning</span>, Valsalva maneuver, prompt needle/catheter occlusion, and tight intravenous connections can help to avoid this complication [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">18</a></span>]. CVC removal should be performed during exhalation when intrathoracic pressure is greater than atmospheric pressure. Firm pressure should be applied for at least 1 min following removal.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec13"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.11 </span>How Could an Inadvertent <span id="ITerm83">Arterial Puncture</span> Lead to This Clinical Presentation?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par67">Serious blood loss associated with CVC placement is uncommon; however, hematomas can develop after inadvertent <span id="ITerm84">arterial puncture</span><span id="ITerm85"/> which can compress associated structures. In the case of inadvertent carotid puncture, this can obstruct the airway and be life-threatening [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">19</a></span>]. Unrecognized <span id="ITerm86">arterial puncture</span> with subsequent dilation of the arteriotomy and catheter placement, particularly of large-bore catheters (i.e., greater than 7 Fr), can lead to life-threatening bleeding into the chest, retroperitoneum, or thigh, depending on the access site.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec14"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.12 </span>If an <span id="ITerm87">Arterial Puncture</span> Was Suspected Intraoperatively, What Should Have Been Done?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par68">Once an arterial stick is suspected, the needle should be immediately withdrawn and direct, but nonocclusive, pressure applied to the site continuously for 15 min to prevent hematoma formation. Bleeding usually resolves within 10–15 min with direct compression, which is more easily performed at the femoral and jugular sites as compared with the subclavian site. Because tunneled hemodialysis and pheresis catheters can be quite large (often greater than 12 Fr), inadvertent arterial placement of either of these catheters mandates emergency consultation with a vascular surgeon. Removal of these catheters should not be attempted without surgical oversight since removal of such large-bore devices risks serious hemorrhage and almost always requires vascular repair [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">20</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec15"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.13 </span>Which CVC Insertion Site Is More Prone to Hematoma Formation with Accidental <span id="ITerm88">Arterial Puncture</span><span id="ITerm89"/>? Which Site Is More Prone to Cause Airway Compromise?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par69">Mechanical complications are more common after attempted insertion of a CVC into the subclavian vein compared with the other sites. The subclavian site is least amenable to direct compression and therefore more prone to hematoma formation.</p><p class="Para" id="Par70">The carotid artery is near critical airway structures and more prone to cause airway compromise when inadvertently punctured such as during attempted internal or external jugular venous cannulation. The rate of mechanical complications is significantly decreased with the use of dynamic ultrasound-guided venous access [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">21</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.14 </span>Any Late Complications That You Are Concerned About with Accidental <span id="ITerm90">Arterial Puncture</span><span id="ITerm91"/>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par71">Late recognition of <span id="ITerm92">arterial catheterization</span> increases the risk of hemorrhagic or thrombotic complications, and in this patient with ALL, preoperative attention to platelet count and coagulation profile would be indicated. Inadvertent catheterization of the carotid or subclavian artery with a large-bore catheter (>7 Fr) can cause arterial thrombosis, hemorrhage, stroke, pseudoaneurysm, or death.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec17"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.15 </span>Could a Dysrhythmia Account for This Clinical Picture? Any Preventative Steps?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par72"><span id="ITerm93">Non-tunneled CVCs</span> positioned deep into the right atrium are more likely to cause dysrhythmias. Catheter movement of up to 3 cm is common with patient movement and this repositioning may cause delayed symptoms. During insertion, direct visualization of the wire/catheter under fluoroscopy and limiting the depth of guidewire insertion help avoid this complication.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec18"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.16 </span>Would You Order Any <span id="ITerm94">Diagnostic Studies</span> in This Patient?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par73">A chest radiograph and echocardiogram were ordered given the patients clinical decompensation. One could also consider ordering an ultrasound of the chest.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec19"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.17 </span>What Are the Expected Chest X-ray Findings for Aspiration, <span id="ITerm95">Pulmonary Edema</span>, and <span id="ITerm96">Pneumothorax</span>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par74">The radiographic findings of aspiration depend on the positioning of the patient at the time of the event. The right lower lung lobe is the most common site of an infiltrate due to the larger caliber and more vertical orientation of the right mainstem bronchus; however, patients lying in the left lateral decubitus position during an aspiration event are more likely to have left-sided infiltrates. Other suggestive chest x-ray findings for aspiration pneumonia include lobar pneumonia, areas of opacity, and/or unilateral consolidation. With <span id="ITerm97">pulmonary edema</span>, a chest x-ray often demonstrates increased fluid within the alveolar walls as well as increased vascular filling, Kerley B lines, and peribronchial cuffing. In a patient with a suspected <span id="ITerm98">pneumothorax</span>, the chest x-ray will demonstrate ipsilateral lung collapse and possible mediastinum shift away from <span id="ITerm99">pneumothorax</span>.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec20"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.18 </span>What Are the Expected Echocardiographic Findings for Tamponade?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par75">The echocardiographic findings of <span id="ITerm100">tamponade</span><span id="ITerm101"/> include presence of a pericardial effusion, diastolic right ventricular collapse (high specificity), systolic right atrial collapse (earliest sign), a plethoric inferior vena cava with minimal respiratory variation (high sensitivity), and exaggerated respiratory cycle changes in mitral and tricuspid valve inflow velocities as a surrogate for pulsus paradoxus [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">22</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">23</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec21"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.19 </span>What Is a Tension <span id="ITerm102">Pneumothorax</span><span id="ITerm103"/>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par76">A pneumothorax is lung collapse that is secondary to air accumulation between the parietal and visceral pleura of the lung. A <span id="ITerm104">tension pneumothorax</span> is a more severe condition whereby the pleural space is under pressure leading to displacement of mediastinal structures which compromises cardiopulmonary function. In a tension pneumothorax, air enters into the pleural space but cannot fully exit (similar to a one-way valve mechanism) [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">24</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec22"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.20 </span>How Would You Diagnose a <span id="ITerm105">Tension Pneumothorax</span>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par77">Clinical signs of a <span id="ITerm106">tension pneumothorax</span><span id="ITerm107"/> include absence of unilateral breath sounds, asymmetric lung expansion, hypoxia, respiratory failure, and evidence of hemodynamic compromise including <span id="ITerm108">hypotension</span>, tachycardia, and/or cardiac arrest [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">24</a></span>]. Chest x-ray, chest CT, or ultrasonography can be used, but if clinically unstable and the clinical suspicion is high, then intervention should not be withheld to await imaging [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">25</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec23"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.21 </span>What Are the Chest X-ray Findings of a <span id="ITerm109">Tension Pneumothorax</span>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par78">Chest X-ray findings include ipsilateral lung collapse, mediastinum shift away from <span id="ITerm110">pneumothorax</span>, subcutaneous emphysema, tracheal deviation to the contralateral side of the <span id="ITerm111">pneumothorax</span>, and flattening of hemidiaphragm on the ipsilateral side.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec24"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.22 </span>Which PALS Algorithm Will You Use?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par79">The patient meets criteria for a <span id="ITerm112">pulseless electrical activity (PEA) arrest</span>. <span id="ITerm113">Pulseless electrical activity (PEA)</span> is a life-threatening and unshockable rhythm. PEA may include any pulseless <span id="ITerm114">EKG</span> waveform except ventricular fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, or asystole.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec25"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.23 </span>If the Child Is in PEA Arrest, What Is Your Next Step?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par80">You should begin <span id="ITerm115">CPR</span> immediately. Push hard and fast at 100–120 beats per minute. Ventilate with a bag-mask and attach to supplemental oxygen (assuming that there is no significant cardiac disease that would preclude use of 100% oxygen). Two-person <span id="ITerm116">CPR</span> for a child without a definitive airway should begin at a ratio of 15 compressions to 2 <span id="ITerm117">breaths</span>. Attach a monitor/defibrillator as soon as possible and check for a shockable rhythm. If no shockable rhythm is detected (asystole/PEA), give epinephrine 0.01 mg/kg every 3–5 min. Continue <span id="ITerm118">CPR</span> and treat the reversible causes. If a shockable rhythm is detected, defibrillate with a shock of 2 J/kg and resume <span id="ITerm119">CPR</span> immediately after the shock. Continue <span id="ITerm120">CPR</span> and check for a shockable rhythm every 2 min. Increase the joules to 4 J/kg, increasing with every shock up to 10 J/kg or to an adult dose. Consider an advanced airway and place the patient on a capnography monitor. Amiodarone IV/IO 5 mg/kg and bolus of lidocaine 1 mg/kg can be given for ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia. Consider and treat the reversible causes.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec26"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.24 </span>What Is Considered Good Quality <span id="ITerm121">CPR</span>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par81">Good-quality <span id="ITerm122">CPR</span><span id="ITerm123"/> includes rotating compressors every 2 min, maintaining a compression-ventilation ratio of 15:2 without an advanced airway, or performing continuous chest compressions and ventilating at 8–10 breaths per minute with an advanced airway in place. In addition, when performing chest compressions, push at least 1/2 of the anterior-posterior diameter of the chest wall and allow for complete recoil of the chest.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec27"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.25 </span>What Are the Reversible Causes You Consider with PEA Arrest?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par82">Reversible causes for <span id="ITerm124">PEA arrest</span> include acidosis (hydrogen ion), hypoxia, hypovolemia, hypothermia, hypo-/hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, toxins, cardiac tamponade, tension <span id="ITerm125">pneumothorax</span>, coronary thrombosis, and pulmonary thrombosis.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec28"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.26 </span>What Are the Interventions for These Reversible Causes of <span id="ITerm126">PEA Arrest</span>?<span id="ITerm127"/></h3><div class="Para" id="Par83"><div class="Table" id="Tabb"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><tbody><tr><td rowspan="8" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hs</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Etiology</strong></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Treatment</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hydrogen ion (acidosis)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Provide adequate ventilation</p><p class="SimplePara">• Administer sodium bicarbonate</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypovolemia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Intravenous fluid administration</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypoxia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Ensure airway patency</p><p class="SimplePara">• Ensure adequate ventilation</p><p class="SimplePara">• Administer supplemental oxygen</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypoglycemia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Administer dextrose</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hyperkalemia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Glucose/insulin</p><p class="SimplePara">• Bicarbonate</p><p class="SimplePara">• Intravenous calcium</p><p class="SimplePara">• Beta-agonist</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypokalemia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Potassium replacement</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypothermia</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• External rewarming</p><p class="SimplePara">• Warm intravenous fluids</p><p class="SimplePara">• Antibiotic administration</p><p class="SimplePara">• Humidified oxygen administration</p></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Ts</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Coronary thrombosis</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Acute coronary syndrome algorithm</p><p class="SimplePara">• Oxygen</p><p class="SimplePara">• Aspirin</p><p class="SimplePara">• Nitroglycerin</p><p class="SimplePara">• Thrombolytics</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pulmonary thrombosis</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Thrombolytics</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cardiac tamponade</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Pericardiocentesis</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Tension <span id="ITerm128">pneumothorax</span></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Needle decompression</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Trauma</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• IV fluids</p><p class="SimplePara">• Transfusion</p><p class="SimplePara">• Surgery</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Toxicosis</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">• Reversal of toxin (if possible)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec29"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.27 </span>If You Are Suspecting a Tension <span id="ITerm129">Pneumothorax</span>, How Would You Perform a Needle Decompression?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par84">Needle decompression is an important and life-saving maneuver in the management of a <span id="ITerm130">tension pneumothorax</span><span id="ITerm131"/><span id="ITerm132"/>. Needle decompression involves placing an angiocatheter into the second intercostal space midclavicular line, along the anterior chest wall and just above the third rib. This results in re-expansion of the collapsed lung.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec30"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.28 </span>How Does the <span id="ITerm133">Needle Decompression</span> in a Pediatric Patient Differ from an Adult Patient?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par85">In adults and children older than 15 years of age, the fifth intercostal space, anterior axillary line can be used. However, the second intercostal space, midclavicular line remains an option.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec31"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.29 </span>Should the Patient Be Intubated Prior to Needle Decompression?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par86">Endotracheal intubation, if performed prior to <span id="ITerm134">needle decompression</span><span id="ITerm135"/>, can lead to the rapid accumulation of intrathoracic air, thereby converting a simple <span id="ITerm136">pneumothorax</span> to tension physiology. As a result, prior to needle decompression, positive pressure ventilation should be avoided as it will contribute to increasing the size of the <span id="ITerm137">pneumothorax</span>. However, administration of 100% supplemental oxygen is advisable as this will help reduce the size of the <span id="ITerm138">pneumothorax</span> by decreasing the alveolar partial pressure of nitrogen [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">24</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">26</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec32"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.30 </span>Should a Chest Tube Be Inserted Following Needle Decompression?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par87"><span id="ITerm139">Needle decompression</span><span id="ITerm140"/> is the first step and must be followed by the placement of a chest tube to allow for the evacuation of the presumed ongoing air leak. Chest x-ray is done to assess for resolution of the <span id="ITerm141">pneumothorax</span>.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec33"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.31 </span>Any Concerns with Rapid Lung Re-expansion?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par88"><span id="ITerm142">Rapid lung re-expansion</span> increases the risk of <span id="ITerm143">pulmonary edema</span>.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec34"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.32 </span>What Are the Possible Procedural Factors Which May Have Contributed to the Development of a <span id="ITerm144">Pneumothorax</span><span id="ITerm145"/>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par89">Multiple attempts for supradiaphragmatic lines are associated with an increased rate of complications such as the development of pneumothoraces. The rate of complications is significantly decreased with the use of ultrasound-guided venous access. Dynamic ultrasound-guided puncture of the vein with imaging of the wire in the vein prior to dilation and catheter placement along with fluoroscopic guidance of the wires and catheter have been shown to increase technical success and reduce mechanical complication rates [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">21</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec35"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.33 </span>How Would You Differentiate <span id="ITerm146">Pneumothorax</span><span id="ITerm147"/> from Cardiac Tamponade?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par90">It can be difficult to differentiate <span id="ITerm148">pneumothorax</span> from cardiac tamponade since the clinical findings can be similar. Cardiac tamponade is a rare complication of central line insertion. The classic triad of low systemic blood pressure, jugular venous distension, and muffled/distant heart sounds, which is also known as Beck’s triad, may be seen in some children with tamponade. Additional clinical findings of cardiac tamponade include tachycardia, tachypnea, respiratory distress, tachypnea, and hypoxemia. A narrow pulse pressure and pulsus paradoxus can also be seen. Chest x-ray may demonstrate an enlarged cardiac silhouette, and the EKG may show low voltage complexes, electrical alternans, and sinus tachycardia. Echocardiography is the primary diagnostic tool and may demonstrate cardiac chamber collapse and increased atrioventricular valve inflow respiratory variation. The definitive treatment for cardiac tamponade is pericardiocentesis with possible pericardial drain placement [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">27</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec36"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.34 </span>Any Preventative Measures to Reduce the Likelihood of Causing a <span id="ITerm149">Pneumothorax?</span><span id="ITerm150"/></h3><p class="Para" id="Par91">Limiting the number of attempts can reduce the likelihood of causing a <span id="ITerm151">pneumothorax</span><span id="ITerm152"/> since line-associated mechanical complications increase with the number of attempts. In a prospective cohort study, the incidence of mechanical complications was sixfold higher when there were more than three insertion attempts, compared with successful insertion on the first attempt [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR28" role="doc-biblioref">28</a></span>]. As a result, it is reasonable for an operator to seek assistance if a CVC cannot be successfully inserted after three attempts.</p><p class="Para" id="Par92">In addition, real-time ultrasound guidance is superior to blind, landmark-guided techniques particularly for CVC insertion into the internal jugular vein. Confirming CVC positioning with a chest radiograph x-ray is also advisable. Failure to confirm the position can be problematic since clinician judgment does not consistently predict catheter malposition or other mechanical complications [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR29" role="doc-biblioref">29</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec37"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.35 </span>What Are the Pros and Cons of the Various CVC <span id="ITerm153">Access Sites</span>?</h3><div class="Para" id="Par93"><div class="Table" id="Tabc"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th colspan="2" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Pros</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cons</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Internal jugular vein</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Minimal risk of <span id="ITerm154">pneumothorax</span></p><p class="SimplePara">(Especially with US guidance)</p><p class="SimplePara">Head-of-table access</p><p class="SimplePara">Procedure-related bleeding amenable to direct pressure</p><p class="SimplePara">Lower failure rate with novice operator</p><p class="SimplePara">Excellent target using US guidance</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Risk of carotid artery puncture</p><p class="SimplePara">Uncomfortable</p><p class="SimplePara">Thoracic duct injury possible on left</p><p class="SimplePara">Poor landmarks in obese/edematous patients</p><p class="SimplePara">Potential access and maintenance issues with concomitant tracheostomy (non-tunneled)</p><p class="SimplePara">Vein prone to collapse with hypovolemia</p><p class="SimplePara">Difficult access during emergencies when airway control being established</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">External jugular vein</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Superficial vessel that is often visible</p><p class="SimplePara">Coagulopathy not prohibitive</p><p class="SimplePara">Minimal risk of <span id="ITerm155">pneumothorax</span> (especially with US guidance)</p><p class="SimplePara">Head-of-table access</p><p class="SimplePara">Rapid venous access</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Not ideal for prolonged venous access</p><p class="SimplePara">Poor landmarks in obese patients</p><p class="SimplePara">High rate of malposition</p><p class="SimplePara">Catheter may be difficult to thread</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Subclavian vein</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Easier to maintain dressings</p><p class="SimplePara">More comfortable for patient (non-tunneled)</p><p class="SimplePara">Better landmarks in obese patients</p><p class="SimplePara">Accessible when airway control is being established</p><p class="SimplePara">Associated with lower incidence of catheter-related infection</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Increased risk of <span id="ITerm156">pneumothorax</span></p><p class="SimplePara">Procedure-related bleeding less amenable to direct pressure</p><p class="SimplePara">Decreased success rate with inexperience</p><p class="SimplePara">Longer path from skin to vessel</p><p class="SimplePara">Catheter malposition more common (especially right SCV)</p><p class="SimplePara">Interference with chest compressions</p><p class="SimplePara">Risk for stenosis/occlusion, which impacts future hemodialysis arteriovenous access</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Femoral vein</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Rapid access with high success rate</p><p class="SimplePara">Does not interfere with <span id="ITerm157">CPR</span></p><p class="SimplePara">Does not interfere with intubation</p><p class="SimplePara">No risk of <span id="ITerm158">pneumothorax</span></p><p class="SimplePara">Trendelenburg position not necessary during insertion</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Delayed circulation of drugs during <span id="ITerm159">CPR</span></p><p class="SimplePara">Prevents patient mobilization</p><p class="SimplePara">Difficult to keep site sterile with increased risk of infection</p><p class="SimplePara">Difficult for PA catheter insertion</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par94"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Case continues:</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par95">Our patient had a <span id="ITerm160">pneumothorax</span> which was suspected by clinical signs in PACU and confirmed by chest x-ray. Since this was diagnosed rapidly and the air was removed by percutaneous needle decompression followed by chest tube insertion, the patient was resuscitated successfully. He was intubated after the evacuation of <span id="ITerm161">pneumothorax</span> and was sent to PICU for ventilation and continuous assessment of hemodynamic status. There was a small amount of blood draining out when the <span id="ITerm162">pneumothorax</span> was first evacuated however, this resolved after he was treated with 4 units of platelets. He was extubated a few days after the event and transferred to the oncology floor for chemotherapy. He had a reassuring neurological evaluation before discharge and was advised to return as an outpatient for further therapy of his ALL.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec38"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3 </span>Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par96">Acute <span id="ITerm163">pneumothorax</span> is a life-threatening emergency which needs prompt diagnosis and treatment to avoid further hemodynamic deterioration and death. This young boy with a diagnosis of ALL with low hematocrit and platelet count should not undergo needle entry into any major vessels, solely guided by anatomic landmarks. The ideal method is to select a superficial vessel like internal jugular vein, to enter it by a small surgical cut down or with a small needle inserted under ultrasound guidance or fluoroscopy. After successful atraumatic entry into the vessel, a guidewire can be inserted to help navigate the large-bore double lumen central line into the ideal central location.</p><p class="Para" id="Par97">In conclusion, this case scenario of postoperative complication of <span id="ITerm164">pneumothorax</span> could have been avoided if the central venous entry was guided by real-time ultrasonography or fluoroscopic guidance. In addition, a confirmatory chest x-ray should always be obtained postoperatively before the patient is awakened and transferred to PACU. In the practice of medicine, this following dictum is well known: “Prevention of a complication is better than diagnosing it and treating it immediately.” Therefore, the perioperative team members should focus on providing the safest and best care to these fragile patients by entering the vein on the first attempt by <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">seeing</em> the vessel with ultrasound or fluoroscopic guidance and thus avoiding inadvertent entry into adjacent structures.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">1.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Bannon MP, Heller SF, Rivera M. Anatomic considerations for central venous cannulation. Risk Manag Healthc Policy. 2011;4:27–39. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S10383"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​2147/​RMHP.​S10383</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/RMHP.S10383"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=22312225"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3270925"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">2.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Warner MA, Warner ME, Warner DO, et al. Perioperative pulmonary aspiration in infants and children. Anesthesiology. 1999;90:66.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199901000-00011"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=9915314"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">3.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Kubacki T, Haché M. Down syndrome. In: Houck PJ, Haché M, Sun LS, editors. Handbook of pediatric anesthesia. New York: McGraw Hill; 2015.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">4.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Oswalt CE, Gates GA, Holmstrom MG. Pulmonary edema as a complication of acute airway obstruction. JAMA. 1977;238:1833–5.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.1977.03280180037022"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=333133"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">5.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Lang SA, Duncan PG, Shephard DA, Ha HC. Pulmonary oedema associated with airway obstruction. Can J Anaesth. 1990;37:210–8.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03005472"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=2178789"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">6.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Celik B, Sahin E, Nadir A, Kaptanoglu M. Iatrogenic pneumothorax: etiology, incidence and risk factors. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2009;57:286.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0029-1185365"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19629891"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">7.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Larsson AS, Jørgensen IM. [Acupuncture-induced bilateral pneumothorax in a 16-year-old boy]. Ugeskr Laeger. 2018;180.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">8.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Nicholson T, Ettles D, Robinson G. Managing inadvertent arterial catheterization during central venous access procedures. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2004;27:21.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00270-003-0043-8"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15109223"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">9.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Guilbert MC, Elkouri S, Bracco D, et al. Arterial trauma during central venous catheter insertion: case series, review and proposed algorithm. J Vasc Surg. 2008;48:918.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2008.04.046"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=18703308"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">10.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Boyd R, Saxe A, Phillips E. Effect of patient position upon success in placing central venous catheters. Am J Surg. 1996;172:380.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9610(96)00198-5"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=8873535"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">11.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Tripathi M, Dubey PK, Ambesh SP. Direction of the J-tip of the guidewire, in Seldinger technique, is a significant factor in misplacement of subclavian vein catheter: a randomized, controlled study. Anesth Analg. 2005;100:21.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000139349.40278.77"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15616046"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">12.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Toung TJ, Rossberg MI, Hutchins GM. Volume of air in a lethal venous air embolism. Anesthesiology. 2001;94:360.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-200102000-00031"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11176104"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">13.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Brull SJ, Prielipp RC. Vascular air embolism: a silent hazard to patient safety. J Crit Care. 2017;42:255.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrc.2017.08.010"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28802790"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">14.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Khouzam RN, Soufi MK, Weatherly M. Heparin infusion through a central line misplaced in the carotid artery leading to hemorrhagic stroke. J Emerg Med. 2013;45:87–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.12.026"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jemermed.​2012.​12.​026</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2012.12.026"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">15.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">McCarthy CJ, Behravesh S, Naidu SG, Oklu R. Air embolism: practical tips for prevention and treatment. J Clin Med. 2016;5:93.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm5110093"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27809224"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5126790"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">16.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Roberts S, Johnson M, Davies S. Near-fatal air embolism: fibrin sheath as the portal of air entry. South Med J. 2003;96:1036.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/01.SMJ.0000051067.20708.5F"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=14570352"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">17.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Laskey AL, Dyer C, Tobias JD. Venous air embolism during home infusion therapy. Pediatrics. 2002;109:E15.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.109.1.e15"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11773583"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">18.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Ely EW, Hite RD, Baker AM, et al. Venous air embolism from central venous catheterization: a need for increased physician awareness. Crit Care Med. 1999;27:2113.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00003246-199910000-00006"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=10548191"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">19.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Kander T, Frigyesi A, Kjeldsen-Kragh J, et al. Bleeding complications after central line insertions: relevance of pre-procedure coagulation tests and institutional transfusion policy. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2013;57:573.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.12075"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23336361"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">20.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Shah PM, Babu SC, Goyal A, et al. Arterial misplacement of large-caliber cannulas during jugular vein catheterization: case for surgical management. J Am Coll Surg. 2004;198:939.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2004.02.015"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15194076"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">21.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Stone MB, Nagdev A, Murphy MC, Sisson CA. Ultrasound detection of guidewire position during central venous catheterization. Am J Emerg Med. 2010;28:82.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2008.09.019"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20006207"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">22.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Armstrong WF, et al. Diastolic collapse of the right ventricle with cardiac tamponade: an echocardiographic study. Circulation. 1982;65(7):1491–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.65.7.1491"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=7074806"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">23.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">Singh S, et al. Right ventricular and right atrial collapse in patients with cardiac tamponade–a combined echocardiographic and hemodynamic study. Circulation. 1984;70(6):966–71.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.70.6.966"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=6499153"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">24.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">Jalota R, Sayad E. Tension pneumothorax. Treasure Island: StatPearls; 2021.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">25.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR25">Williams K, Baumann L, Grabowski J, Lautz TB. Current practice in the management of spontaneous pneumothorax in children. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2019;29(4):551–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1089/lap.2018.0629"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30592692"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">26.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR26">Vallee P, Sullivan M, Richardson H, Bivins B, Tomlanovich M. Sequential treatment of a simple pneumothorax. Ann Emerg Med. 1988;17(9):936–42.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196-0644(88)80676-0"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=3137850"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">27.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR27">Li SS, Rossfeld Z, Basu SK. Cardiac tamponade in a child with fever of unknown origin. Hosp Pediatr. 2017;7(11):692–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/hpeds.2017-0071"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29089379"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">28.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR28">Britt RC, Novosel TJ, Britt LD, Sullivan M. The impact of central line simulation before the ICU experience. Am J Surg. 2009;197:533.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjsurg.2008.11.016"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19249739"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">29.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR29">Abood GJ, Davis KA, Esposito TJ, et al. Comparison of routine chest radiograph versus clinician judgment to determine adequate central line placement in critically ill patients. J Trauma. 2007;63:50.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=17622868"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li></ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>