<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Persistent Vomiting After Eye Muscle Surgery</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-3-031-24396-7_16"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">S. T. Verghese<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Anesthesia STAT!  Acute Pediatric Emergencies in PACU</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_16">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_16</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">Persistent Vomiting After Eye Muscle Surgery</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Nina Rawtani</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Division of Anesthesiology, Sedation and Perioperative Medicine, Children’s National Hospital—George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Nina Rawtani</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:nrawtani@childrensnational.org">nrawtani@childrensnational.org</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Strabismus surgery</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">PONV</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Persistent vomiting</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Pediatric patient</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Anesthetic management</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle3" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Educational Objectives</div><div class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par2"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par3">Utilize prophylactic methods of postoperative nausea and vomiting in pediatric patients undergoing strabismus surgery.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par4">Execute anesthetic plan and recognize possible postoperative problems after pediatric strabismus surgery.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par5">Define risks, treatment options, and complications of postoperative nausea and vomiting.</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par6">Strategize options for treatment of persistent postoperative nausea and vomiting in the pediatric population.</p></li></ul></div></div></div><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">1 </span>Stem Case</h2><div class="Para" id="Par7">A 5-year-old 21 kg young girl is undergoing bilateral strabismus surgery late on a Thursday afternoon. She is otherwise healthy except for a history of motion sickness. After a thorough preoperative assessment, the anesthesia team determines that she has been NPO appropriate since last night with no recent URI symptoms. The patient has no history of prior surgery or anesthesia, but her mother states that she has significant motion sickness and tends to throw up if the car ride is long. The plan for anesthesia includes general anesthesia with an endotracheal tube. Her parents agree with the plan and the patient walks back while chatting about her friends at summer camp. Induction is smooth with a mask induction, followed by placement of a 22 g PIV in the left hand and easy intubation with a 5.0 cuffed ETT after a bolus of propofol. The surgeon proceeds with the procedure.<div class="OrderedList"><ol><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">1.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par8"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Although this patient is healthy, what medical conditions are associated with a child having ocular problems that may require surgical intervention?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par9"><span id="ITerm1">Patients</span> with ocular impairments may have syndromes known for a difficult airway, such as <span id="ITerm2">Pierre Robin syndrome</span>, <span id="ITerm3">Treacher Collins syndrome</span>, <span id="ITerm4">Apert syndrome</span>, <span id="ITerm5">Crouzon disease</span>, <span id="ITerm6">mucopolysaccharidosis</span>, and glycogen storage disease [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. Children with certain muscle diseases may have congenital strabismus and have a high risk of malignant hyperthermia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. Of note, strabismus surgery itself is not associated with malignant hyperthermia.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">2.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par10"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Does the history of motion sickness increase her chance of vomiting after anesthesia and surgery?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par11">Motion sickness does increase <span id="ITerm7">her</span> chance of vomiting afterward. Several studies have shown that motion sickness is a reliable predictor of increased risk of PONV. In assessing patient risk for PONV, the most reliable independent predictors include female gender, history of PONV, history of motion sickness, nonsmoker, and younger age [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">3.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par12"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">In your preop interview and informed consent, do you explain to the parent the high incidence of vomiting that can occur in their child because of motion sickness as well as her surgery?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par13">With the increased risk of PONV due to the patient’s independent risk factors and the type of procedure, it is important to discuss with the parent the higher-than-average incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting for our patient. <span id="ITerm8">Informed consent</span> within the realm of pediatric anesthesia is complex and unique. <span id="ITerm9">Consent</span> is obtained by the parent or legal guardian of the patient but should still include essential elements. <span id="ITerm10">Informed consent</span> includes a description of the plan, alternatives, risks, benefits, discussion of uncertainties, assessment of comprehension, and solicitation of a decision [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">4.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par14"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What is your plan for prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) for this patient?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par15">Anesthetic management to <span id="ITerm11">prevent </span>PONV is a multimodal approach that includes adequate hydration, pharmacologic treatments, avoidance of certain medications, and even anesthetic type. Some institutions have protocolized plans for strabismus surgery. Creating a toolbox or a protocol for PONV prevention during strabismus surgery has been shown to reduce incidence of postoperative nausea and vomiting [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>]. Preoperative and intraoperative hydration can decrease PONV by allowing clears up to 2 h before procedure and giving intravenous fluids during the procedure.</p><p class="Para" id="Par16">Pharmacological treatments include <span id="ITerm12">serotonin (5HT) antagonists</span>, steroids, butyrophenones, and antihistamines. Initially, a combination of 5-HT<sub>3</sub> antagonists and steroids can be highly effective at PONV prevention [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. A combination of ondansetron and dexamethasone has been shown to decrease PONV in comparison to either agent alone. Gastric emptying after intubation in combination with this multimodal approach can aid in PONV prevention [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par17">Avoiding opioids or using short-acting opioids and nonopioid analgesics can also help in decreasing the risk of PONV. Avoiding nitrous oxide and volatile inhalational agents is shown to decrease the incidence in those at higher risk of PONV. These patients may benefit from a <span id="ITerm13">total intravenous anesthetic (TIVA)</span> approach, especially with a known history of PONV. A TIVA approach has been shown to decrease PONV as well as emergence agitation but can increase the oculocardiac reflex [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>]. In a meta-analysis of 4 randomized trials of 558 children who underwent strabismus surgery, the researchers compared the effectiveness of a single pharmacologic prophylaxis to that of TIVA and found that both were equally effective in preventing vomiting in the postoperative period with similar time in the PACU. The children in the TIVA group took significantly less time to resume drinking and eating compared to the non-TIVA group. They concluded that the emetogenic effect of <span id="ITerm14">inhalational</span> anesthetic can be compensated adequately by administering a single prophylactic antiemetic medication [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">5.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par18"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">She has been NPO since last night and the case is starting at 2:30 PM</em></p><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par19"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">How much fluid should you plan on giving intraop for a prolonged fast? Is there a need to check blood sugar?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par20"><span id="ITerm15">Intraoperative hydration</span> with a balanced salt solution at 30 mL/kg can greatly decrease the incidence of PONV [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>]. Preoperatively, allowing clears up to 2 h before surgery can decrease dehydration as well. With the prolonged fasting time in this patient, maintenance IV fluids with dextrose or a preoperative glucose check may be valuable for patient. However, initial bolus hydration should be an isotonic solution without dextrose.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">6.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par21"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Why is preventing PONV important? What are the complications of PONV that can lead to patient morbidity in the pediatric population?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par22">Nausea is the sensation of <span id="ITerm16">feeling</span> sick with the inclination to vomit. Vomiting is the act of retching and forcefully expelling the stomach’s contents out of the mouth. It is one of the most common complaints from parents in the recovery area. PONV can lead to dehydration, delayed discharge, prolonged stay in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), parental and surgeon’s dissatisfaction, and even unplanned admission for patients [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par23">In specific ophthalmic cases, the increased intraocular pressure with retching and vomiting can be deleterious for patient’s eye wound closure and cause increased bleeding; it is imperative that every effort is taken to eliminate vomiting.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">7.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par24"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What is the mechanism for nausea and vomiting in pediatric patients?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par25">Several areas in <span id="ITerm17">the </span>central nervous system contribute to vomiting including the emetic center, the nucleus of the solitary tract, area postrema, and chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ). These areas receive a stimulus from peripheral or central areas that trigger a response [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. The sensation of nausea or vomiting is an instinctive defense reaction in the body caused by the somato-autonomic nerve reflex integrated in the medulla oblongata [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">12</a></span>]. Certain medications or situations are associated with the release of <span id="ITerm18">5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)</span> from enterochromaffin cells. These cells are in the intestinal mucosa and the brainstem. The 5-HT then binds to the 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptors located on adjacent vagal afferent nerves which result in the vomiting reflex.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">8.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par26"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Why are children undergoing strabismus surgery at an increased risk for PONV?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par27">It has been shown that nausea and vomiting after strabismus surgery can occur in 45–85% of cases [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>]. <span id="ITerm19">Strabismus surgery</span> can cause altered visual perception, which is hypothesized to cause an oculo-emetic <span id="ITerm20">reflex</span>, which is similar to the oculocardiac reflex [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. Studies show that the more <span id="ITerm21">extraocular muscles (EOM)</span> involved in the surgery, the greater the incidence as well. Involvement of certain EOM, such as the inferior oblique muscle, can increase the risk as well.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">9.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par28"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Other than strabismus surgery, what are other risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par29">Risk factors include <span id="ITerm22">history </span>of motion sickness, migraine, previous history of PONV, duration of anesthesia >30 min, female, nonsmoking status, and younger age. Of note, a lower incidence is seen in children &lt;3 years of age.</p><p class="Para" id="Par30">Certain types of surgeries other than strabismus surgery can also increase the risk of PONV. Pediatric surgeries with a higher incidence include strabismus repair, adenotonsillectomy, hernia repair, orchiopexy, penile surgery, laparoscopy, brain surgery, and certain ENT procedures. Manipulating certain areas, such as balance, vasomotor activity, salivation, respiration, and bulbar control to the emetic center can also affect risk [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par31">Certain medical conditions, electrolyte abnormalities, and <span id="ITerm23">medications</span> like chemotherapy are mediated by the vomiting center and the chemoreceptor trigger zone. These factors can increase baseline nausea and thus PONV. Specifically, opioids given during anesthesia can increase nausea and vomiting, and it is documented in strabismus surgery as well.</p><p class="Para" id="Par32">The <span id="ITerm24">Eberhart score</span> is an evaluation method to determine propensity for PONV. The scoring range is 1–4 with a point each for surgery ≥30 min, age ≥ 3 years old, strabismus surgery, and history or family history of PONV [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">10.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par33"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">You plan to give ondansetron and dexamethasone intraoperatively. What is the mechanism of each medication?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par34"><span id="ITerm25">Ondansetron</span> is <span id="ITerm26">a</span> selective serotonin 5-HT<sub>3</sub> antagonist that binds to the 5-HT<sub>3</sub> <span id="ITerm27">receptors</span> on the vagal afferent neurons in the gastrointestinal tract and the brainstem [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>]. It’s structure which is similar to serotonin allows it to bind to the receptors [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>]. It has a relatively good safety profile and is approved by the FDA for use in children older than 1 month. This medication shows superior efficacy in reducing postoperative nausea and vomiting in children [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>]. The dosage range is 0.05–0.15 mg/kg with a maximum dose of 4 mg. Thus, ondansetron is considered a first-line antiemetic in children undergoing strabismus surgery and should be administered before the end of surgery.</p><p class="Para" id="Par35"><span id="ITerm28">Ondansetron</span> in combination with dexamethasone is significantly more effective than ondansetron or dexamethasone alone. <span id="ITerm29">Dexamethasone</span> is a corticosteroid that has an antiemetic as well as an anti-inflammatory effect. The antiemetic action is thought to act at the vomiting center [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>]. Intravenous dosing in children is 0.15–0.5 mg/kg with a maximum dose of 8–10 mg.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">11.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par36"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What are some of the side effects of ondansetron?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par37"><span id="ITerm30">Ondansetron</span> is generally well tolerated in pediatric patients. Theoretically, ondansetron can also antagonize the effects of the Bezold-Jarisch <span id="ITerm31">reflex</span> (reflex bradycardia), which is in part due to stimulation of the 5-HT<sub>3</sub> receptors in the vagal nerve endings. It is utilized in higher doses in patients undergoing chemotherapy and has been seen to have minimal side effects such as headache (2–8%), constipation (1–3.5%), and diarrhea (2%) [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par38">Of note, the clearance of ondansetron decreases with age [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>]. This is likely due to age-related decrease in hepatic function. Furthermore, the plasma clearance is decreased in patients with hepatic impairment. Ondansetron undergoes first-pass metabolism by the liver using the enzymes CYP1A1/2, CYP3A, and CYP2D6. Any change in enzyme activity can alter the metabolism of the medication as well.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">12.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par39"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">How does ondansetron affect the QTc interval? What are our concerns with QTc prolongation?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par40">High dose of the drug can prolong the <span id="ITerm32">QTc interval</span> and thus not recommended in those with congenital long QT syndrome. The QTc interval prolongation by ondansetron is similar to the effect seen after administration of droperidol. QT interval prolongation can predispose patients to fatal arrhythmias such as torsade de pointes. The incidence of congenital QT prolongation in the general population is estimated to be 1:2500. Pediatric patients with this syndrome may not have been diagnosed at the time of surgery, and possibility of potential adverse events must be considered when administering this medication [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">16</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par41"><span id="ITerm33">Adverse events</span> can occur due to long QT syndrome and medication interaction. It has been noted during emergence from anesthesia specifically in patients with long QT syndrome who have been given neuromuscular blockade reversal (anticholinesterase anticholinergic drugs) in combination with ondansetron at an incidence of 5.9% [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">17</a></span>]. Compared with sugammadex, reversal of nondepolarizing blocking agent with neostigmine is associated with QT prolongation under general anesthesia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">18</a></span>]. In clinical practice, it is customary not to administer neostigmine and ondansetron simultaneously. In addition, sevoflurane is known to prolong the QTc interval. It’s combination with ondansetron can increase this undesirable effect in children [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">19</a></span>]. Thus, ECG monitoring is essential when the antiemetic is administered.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">13.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par42"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What is your plan for intraoperative and postoperative analgesia?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par43">A multimodal <span id="ITerm34">method </span>can include acetaminophen, intravenous NSAIDs, topical local anesthetic, and minimal opioid usage [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>]. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs <span id="ITerm35">(NSAIDs)</span> and <span id="ITerm36">acetaminophen</span> are effective medications in providing analgesia in pediatric strabismus surgery. Pain scores were comparable in patients who had NSAIDS versus intravenous opioids. However, opioids can increase PONV; thus, minimizing opioids is a reasonable approach.</p><p class="Para" id="Par44">Of note, ondansetron may decrease the efficacy of acetaminophen. A randomized controlled trial on children undergoing tonsillectomy concluded that intravenous administration of 0.1 mg/kg ondansetron reduces the analgesic action of intravenous acetaminophen [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">20</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">14.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par45"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The surgeon begins the procedure, and the heart rate decreases rapidly to 30 beats per minute. What do you do?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par46">The likely cause is the oculocardiac reflex. The <span id="ITerm37">oculocardiac reflex (OCR)</span> also known as Aschner reflex or trigeminovagal reflex (TVR) is a vagal bradycardia triggered by trigeminal stimulation. It involves the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal and vagus nerves. The reflex can be triggered when <span id="ITerm38">traction </span>is applied to the extraocular muscles or pressure on the globe. This causes afferent signals to travel via the trigeminal nerve and produce an efferent signal through the vagal nerve. The vagal response is highly variable and can range from bradycardia to junctional rhythm to asystole. OCR is defined as a heart rate reduction of more than 20% following globe pressure or traction of the extraocular muscles in comparison to baseline heart rate [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">21</a></span>]. Sometimes arrest of spontaneous respiration accompanies the bradycardia. The effect if left untreated can lead to hypoperfusion and possibly asystole and cardiac arrest. <span id="ITerm39">ECG monitoring</span> during muscle manipulation is therefore of paramount importance.</p><p class="Para" id="Par47">OCR is more common with the medial rectus muscle due to the need for increased traction to access it. Light anesthesia and hypercarbia can also cause OCR. The use of opioids and dexamethasone may increase the incidence of OCR.</p><p class="Para" id="Par48">The initial and most effective treatment includes stopping the stimulus by asking the surgeon to release the traction. In addition, anticholinergic medication, atropine or glycopyrrolate, can be given to increase the heart rate. Another dose can be given if the bradycardia persists. Intravenous fluids can be given to aid in increasing the intravascular volume and blood pressure in the patient. Deepening the anesthetic and adequate ventilation can also aid in decreasing the risk of OCR. <span id="ITerm40">Dexmedetomidine</span> has also been found to decrease OCR. Alternate treatments include applying topical lidocaine to interrupt the signaling from the OCR or intravenous ketamine [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">15.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par49"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What are other intraoperative complications of strabismus surgery?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par50"><span id="ITerm41">Oculorespiratory reflex</span> is a change in <span id="ITerm42">respiratory</span> effort during surgery due to muscle traction and is often seen in children. Globe perforation, retinal detachment, slipped muscle, and lost muscle can also been reported during strabismus surgery [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">16.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par51"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The patient is slightly to the side tilted breathing spontaneously with good tidal volumes and no response to oral suctioning stimulation. What are the advantages and disadvantages of a deep extubation in children undergoing ocular surgery?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par52">A <span id="ITerm43">deep extubation</span> refers to the removal of the endotracheal tube while the patient is under deep anesthesia without airway reflexes and spontaneously ventilating. Deep extubation can prevent the increase in intraocular pressure which can occur with awake extubation with the patient coughing and bucking against the endotracheal tube [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">22</a></span>]. The increase in intraocular pressure can further cause surgical complications, such as bleeding, visual problems, or suture unraveling. If deep extubation is planned, <span id="ITerm44">dexmedetomidine</span> can be used at a dose of 0.5 mcg/kg to reduce oculocardiac reflex and PONV [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">23</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par53">Disadvantages of a deep extubation include airway complications, such as airway obstruction, cough, desaturation, laryngospasm, aspiration, and breath holding. A deep extubation should be avoided if the patient has a difficult airway and full stomach or if the practitioner is uncomfortable with the technique. Placing the spontaneously breathing patient in the lateral position and removing the endotracheal tube at a deeper level of anesthesia after suctioning the mouth are helpful to prevent laryngospasm and airway obstruction.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">17.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par54"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What are other alternatives to general anesthesia for strabismus surgery? What are the advantages and disadvantages, particularly in children?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par55"><span id="ITerm45">Regional anesthesia</span> with ophthalmologic regional block can be used as a primary anesthetic technique in adults but may be difficult for children. The patient would be awake and may be uncomfortable during muscle traction intraoperatively. This method can reduce OCR, PONV, and emergence delirium but is not an ideal approach for children. Similarly, topical anesthesia may be advantageous for adults but unsuitable for children [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">18.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par56"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">You proceed to remove the endotracheal tube and assess that she is breathing normally. You place the patient on her side and move her to the stretcher and proceed to PACU. The patient is stable in the recovery area with stable vital signs and appears comfortable in her lateral position. After your hand-off, you explain to the PACU nurse that the reason for avoiding narcotics in the PACU was deliberate because you would like to be informed if she starts vomiting. About 20 min later, you receive a call from the PACU nurse stating that the young girl is awake and has started vomiting. You decide to assess the patient, and when you arrive, the patient has a low blood pressure on the monitor and has vomited twice already. What is your next course of action?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par57">Treatment of the <span id="ITerm46">low blood pressure</span> should include intravenous fluids and medications that may aid in increasing the blood pressure. The low blood pressure could also be contributing to the nausea that the patient is having.</p><p class="Para" id="Par58">Guidelines state that if no prophylaxis or dexamethasone alone was used as initial antiemetic therapy, then a serotonin antagonist should be administered [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">24</a></span>]. In this patient’s case, both a serotonin antagonist and a second agent have been used. The next step is to use a drug from a different class. If triple therapy with 5-HT<sub>3</sub> <span id="ITerm47">antagonist</span> and two other agents were used within 6 h of surgery, then do not repeat initial therapy. Use a drug from a different class or administer a small bolus of propofol as needed. If it has been greater than 6 h, then repeat regimen of the 5-HT<sub>3</sub> antagonist can be used.</p><p class="Para" id="Par59">Several other medications can also aid in reducing nausea for the patient. Antiemetic classes include serotonin antagonists, corticosteroids, butyrophenone, neurokinin antagonists, anticholinergics, and dopamine antagonists. Other medications may include dexmedetomidine and propofol while in PACU.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">19.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par60"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What alterative pharmacological options can be used for PONV?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par61"><span id="ITerm48"/>Serotonin 5-HT<sub>3</sub> <span id="ITerm49">antagonists</span> and <span id="ITerm50">corticosteroids</span> include <span id="ITerm51">ondansetron</span> and <span id="ITerm52">dexamethasone</span>, which have already been given as first-line agents to this patient. Other 5-HT<sub>3</sub> antagonists include granisetron and ramosetron. Oral granisetron administered prior to anesthesia was found to be effective in the first 24 h after strabismus surgery [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. Intravenous granisetron at a dose of 40 mcg/kg is the lowest effective dose for PONV. Intravenous ramosetron is comparable to granisetron as well. Palonosetron is another medication used in the same class.</p><p class="Para" id="Par62"><span id="ITerm53">Droperidol</span> is a butyrophenone that has been shown to reduce nausea in conjunction with ondansetron. However, its risks of extrapyramidal symptoms and drowsiness as well as its black box warning due to <span id="ITerm54">QT prolongation</span> have led to decreased usage in the United States. The warning recommends a 12-lead EKG to be done before the use of droperidol and to continue monitoring 3 h post-administration. A low dose of droperidol is suggested as a second-line antiemetic in Great Britain and Ireland [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par63"><span id="ITerm55">NK-1 receptor antagonists</span> include aprepitant (Emend). This medication has a long half-life and may even be more effective in comparison to ondansetron [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">25</a></span>]. This agent is used to treat patients who are at higher risk of adverse outcomes due to PONV from chemotherapy or those who cannot use the first-line medications.</p><p class="Para" id="Par64"><span id="ITerm56">Metoclopramide</span> is a commonly used antiemetic for treatment of PONV when prophylaxis has failed. Metoclopramide is a dopamine antagonist that is a gastrokinetic medication. High doses can be associated with extrapyramidal side effects, but lower doses can be used for nausea and vomiting.</p><p class="Para" id="Par65"><span id="ITerm57">Scopolamine</span> is an anticholinergic that can be used as a patch typically placed before the anesthetic. It is more effective as a routine antiemetic prophylaxis because of its slow onset of action. In addition, side effects include drowsiness, visual disturbances, and dry mouth, and it should not be detached or moved while placed on the patient. Thus, scopolamine is typically used for higher-risk patients. It is a single-dose patch at 1.5 mg delivered over 72 h. Younger children may have to use a lower dose than the standard adult dosing, and it does not have FDA approval for pediatric patients [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>]. Advantages include long-term effectiveness and cost-effectiveness.</p><p class="Para" id="Par66"><span id="ITerm58">Gabapentin</span> is a <span id="ITerm59">γ-aminobutyric acid</span> analog that is typically used to treat neuropathic pain but may decrease PONV through a decrease in tachykinin neurotransmission [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>]. It may also decrease opioid consumption and emergence delirium in children. It has been shown to aid in refractory vomiting postcraniotomy.</p><p class="Para" id="Par67"><span id="ITerm60">Dexmedetomidine</span> is an α-2 agonist acting as a sedative and analgesic [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">25</a></span>]. It can aid in minimizing opioid use, thus decreasing incidence of PONV. <span id="ITerm61">Clonidine</span> is also an α-2 agonist with promising results in children undergoing strabismus surgery. Propofol is a sedative that is used in small doses mainly for adults for nausea and vomiting in PACU [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. <span id="ITerm62">Dimenhydrinate</span> is another antiemetic used that can produce sedation in patients. Midazolam, a benzodiazepine, is a sedative that has been used in conjunction with other medications for PONV [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">26</a></span>]. <span id="ITerm63">Ketamine</span> is a nonselective antagonist of the <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">N</em>-methyl-<span class="EmphasisTypeSmallCaps ">d</span>-aspartate (NMDA) <span id="ITerm64">receptor</span>, which can be useful as a morphine-sparing analgesic and thus may help in small doses to reduce nausea in combination with other therapies [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">20.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par68"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The PACU nurse is wondering if she should discharge the patient home since she is awake and alert. She is still nauseous and has not had anything to drink. What is your plan?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par69">A trial of fluids by mouth may be appropriate. However, studies have shown that <span id="ITerm65">withholding oral fluid intake in </span>the PACU until the patient is ready can also decrease the incidence of PONV [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">21.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par70"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">What other nonpharmacological options are there for PONV?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par71">Alternative therapies in <span id="ITerm66">aiding</span> nausea may be considered [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. One such method is acupuncture at the PC6 acupoint or acupressure of the P6 point [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>]. This pressure point is located on the inner or palm side of the wrist about 2–4 cm from the wrist crease between the tendons of the palmaris longus and flexor carpi radialis muscles. Wristbands with acupressure concentration on the P6 point have been worn to prevent nausea in the perioperative period. Several studies have shown the effectiveness of reducing nausea and vomiting. When compared to standard anti-emetic medications, <span id="ITerm67">PC6 acupoint stimulation</span> shows no difference.</p><p class="Para" id="Par72">Isopropyl alcohol is another alternative method shown to reduce PONV, although transient with recurrence within 20–60 min. The technique includes inhaling an isopropyl alcohol wipe and repeating up to three times [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par73"><span id="ITerm68">Honey</span> has been used as an adjunct therapy to other medications and effective in reducing use of pain medications through enhanced analgesia effect [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">22.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par74"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The patient feels better but after about an hour she begins gagging and vomiting. What is your next course of action?</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par75">At this point, it is appropriate to consider overnight admission for the patient to receive intravenous fluids and observation. Persistent PONV can lead to dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities, and even surgical complications. After discussion with parents, the ophthalmologist on call, and the hospitalist, the patient is admitted to the floor with <span id="ITerm69">continuous monitoring and hydration </span>via intravenous fluids. After an uneventful night on the floor, she woke up without nausea, ready to eat her breakfast and eventually discharged to go home.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li></ol></div></div></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">1.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Labovsky K. Anesthesia for ophthalmic procedures. In: Ellinas H, Matthes K, Alrayashi W, Bilge A, editors. Clinical pediatric anesthesiology. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2021.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">2.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Bourdeu K, Bayes J, Eappen S. Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery. In: Longnecker DE, Mackey SC, Newman MF, Sandberg WS, Zapol WM, editors. Anesthesiology. 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2017.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">3.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Apfel CC, Heidrich FM, Jukar-Rao S, et al. Evidence-based analysis of risk factors for postoperative nausea and vomiting. Br J Anaesth. 2012;109(5):742–53. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aes276"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bja/​aes276</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aes276"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23035051"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">4.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Gentry KR, Lepere K, Opel DJ. Informed consent in pediatric anesthesiology. Paediatr Anaesth. 2017;27(12):1253–60. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13270"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​13270</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13270"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29076261"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">5.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Ali U, Tsang M, Igbeyi B, et al. A 4-year quality improvement initiative reducing post-operative nausea and vomiting in children undergoing strabismus surgery at a quaternary paediatric hospital. Paediatr Anaesth. 2019;29(7):690–7. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13664"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​13664</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13664"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31091344"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">6.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Smith PV, Walton DS. Prevention of vomiting after general anesthesia for pediatric ophthalmic surgery. AANA J. 2001;69(1):39–43.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11759137"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">7.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Chua AW, Chua MJ, Leung H, Kam PC. Anaesthetic considerations for strabismus surgery in children and adults. Anaesth Intensive Care. 2020;48(4):277–88. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0310057X20937710"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​0310057X20937710​</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1177/0310057X20937710"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32777929"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">8.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Schaefer MS, Kranke P, Weibel S, Kreysing R, Ochel J, Kienbaum P. Total intravenous anesthesia vs single pharmacological prophylaxis to prevent postoperative vomiting in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Paediatr Anaesth. 2017;27(12):1202–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13268"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​13268</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13268"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29094418"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">9.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Lobaugh L, Nguyen V. Strabismus. In: Freeman BS, Berger JS, editors. Anesthesiology core review: part two advanced exam. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education; 2016.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">10.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Kovac AL. Postoperative nausea and vomiting in pediatric patients. Paediatr Drugs. 2021;23(1):11–37. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40272-020-00424-0"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s40272-020-00424-0</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40272-020-00424-0"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33108649"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">11.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Kovac AL. Management of postoperative nausea and vomiting in children. Paediatr Drugs. 2007;9(1):47–69. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2165/00148581-200709010-00005"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​2165/​00148581-200709010-00005</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2165/00148581-200709010-00005"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=17291136"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">12.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Endo T, Minami M, Hirafuji M, et al. Neurochemistry and neuropharmacology of emesis - the role of serotonin. Toxicology. 2000;153(1–3):189–201. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/s0300-483x(00)00314-0"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​s0300-483x(00)00314-0</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/s0300-483x(00)00314-0"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11090957"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">13.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Tyers MB, Freeman AJ. Mechanism of the anti-emetic activity of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists. Oncology. 1992;49(4):263–8. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1159/000227054"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1159/​000227054</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1159/000227054"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=1387926"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">14.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Huddart R, Altman RB, Klein TE. PharmGKB summary: ondansetron and tropisetron pathways, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2019;29(4):91–7. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000369"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​FPC.​0000000000000369​</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/FPC.0000000000000369"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30672837"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6476683"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">15.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Culy CR, Bhana N, Plosker GL. Ondansetron: a review of its use as an antiemetic in children. Paediatr Drugs. 2001;3(6):441–79. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2165/00128072-200103060-00007"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​2165/​00128072-200103060-00007</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2165/00128072-200103060-00007"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11437189"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">16.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">McKechnie K, Froese A. Ventricular tachycardia after ondansetron administration in a child with undiagnosed long QT syndrome. Can J Anaesth. 2010;57(5):453–7. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-010-9288-2"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12630-010-9288-2</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-010-9288-2"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20204717"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">17.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Nathan AT, Berkowitz DH, Montenegro LM, Nicolson SC, Vetter VL, Jobes DR. Implications of anesthesia in children with long QT syndrome. Anesth Analg. 2011;112(5):1163–8. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0b013e3182121d57"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1213/​ANE.​0b013e3182121d57​</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0b013e3182121d57"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=21346158"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">18.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Yamashita Y, Takasusuki T, Kimura Y, Komatsuzaki M, Yamaguchi S. Effects of neostigmine and sugammadex for reversal of neuromuscular blockade on QT dispersion under propofol anesthesia: a randomized controlled trial. Cardiol Ther. 2018;7(2):163–72. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40119-018-0119-9"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s40119-018-0119-9</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40119-018-0119-9"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30218410"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6251823"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">19.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Lee JH, Park YH, Kim JT, Kim CS, Kim HS. The effect of sevoflurane and ondansetron on QT interval and transmural dispersion of repolarization in children. Paediatr Anaesth. 2014;24(4):421–5. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.12339"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​12339</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.12339"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24372925"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">20.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Nikooseresht M, Nasrolahi M, Hajian P, Moradi A. The effects of ondansetron on the analgesic action of intravenous acetaminophen after tonsillectomy in children: a triple-blind randomized controlled trial. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2021;2021:6611740. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6611740"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​2021/​6611740</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6611740"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33981386"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8088369"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">21.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Arnold RW. The oculocardiac reflex: a review. Clin Ophthalmol. 2021;15:2693–725. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S317447"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​2147/​OPTH.​S317447</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S317447"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34194223"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8238553"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">22.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Veyckemans F. Tracheal extubation in children: planning, technique, and complications. Paediatr Anaesth. 2020;30(3):331–8. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13774"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​13774</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13774"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31769576"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">23.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">Li S, Liu T, Xia J, Jia J, Li W. Effect of dexmedetomidine on prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting in pediatric strabismus surgery: A randomized controlled study. BMC Ophthalmol. 2020;20(1):86–3. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-020-01359-3"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12886-020-01359-3</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-020-01359-3"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32138784"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7059381"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">24.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">Gan TJ, Belani KG, Bergese S, et al. Fourth consensus guidelines for the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. Anesth Analg. 2020;131(2):411–48. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000004833"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1213/​ANE.​0000000000004833​</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000004833"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32467512"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">25.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR25">Cao X, White PF, Ma H. An update on the management of postoperative nausea and vomiting. J Anesthesiol. 2017;31(4):617–26. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00540-017-2363-x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00540-017-2363-x</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00540-017-2363-x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">26.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR26">Riad W, Marouf H. Combination therapy in the prevention of PONV after strabismus surgery in children: Granisetron, ondansetron, midazolam with dexamethasone. Middle East J Anaesthesiol. 2009;20(3):431–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19950739"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li></ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>