<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Seizures in a Child After Caudal Block for Circumcision</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-3-031-24396-7_20"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">S. T. Verghese<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Anesthesia STAT!  Acute Pediatric Emergencies in PACU</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_20">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_20</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">Seizures in a Child After Caudal Block for Circumcision</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Andrew T. Waberski</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">George Washington University School of Medicine, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Andrew T. Waberski</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:awabersk@childrensnational.org">awabersk@childrensnational.org</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Convulsions</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Seizures</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Post-anesthesia care unit</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Anesthesia</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Local anesthetic systemic toxicity</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle3" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Objectives</div><div class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par2"><div class="OrderedList"><ol><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">1.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par3">Describe the clinical presentation of seizures in the perioperative setting.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">2.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par4">Understand immediate management of seizure activity in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU).</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">3.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par5">Evaluate the pathophysiologic causes of seizures in the PACU.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">4.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par6">Describe the management strategy of patients with local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST).</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li></ol></div></div></div><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">1 </span>Case History</h2><p class="Para" id="Par7">A 10-month-old 9 kg boy presents to the PACU after a circumcision revision. Prior to handoff, standard monitors are placed and 2 L/min blow by mask oxygenation is instituted. His initial vital signs include heart rate of 110 bpm, blood pressure of 89/40 mmHg, SpO<sub>2</sub> of 99%, respiratory rate of 23 bpm, and axillary temperature of 36.1C. A 24 gauge antecubital IV catheter is infusing lactated Ringer’s solution.</p><p class="Para" id="Par8">The handoff report describes an uncomplicated general anesthetic with straightforward single-shot caudal analgesia. Easy mask induction with sevoflurane, a 24 gauge IV was placed in the foot, and 11 mL of 2% ropivacaine was administered via a caudal block injection. Anesthesia was maintained with a laryngeal mask airway and sevoflurane. The patient’s medical history is significant for a low-birthweight and benign hemangioma requiring propranolol. The patient was extubated awake in the operating room and was comfortable to move to the bed with no issues during transport. The anesthesiologist remarks that the patient seems more lethargic and sleepier after emergence and extubation than he had anticipated. Following handoff, you are alerted to a new progressively noisy breathing pattern. While repositioning the airway, you notice the patient’s head is difficult to manipulate due to a sustained head tilt, and the patient’s saturation has dropped to 90%. On further examination of breathing patterns, you witness repetitive bilateral upper limb jerking movements and diffused leg spasms.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2 </span>What Are Typical Symptoms and Signs of Seizures?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par9">Classic signs of seizures are <span id="ITerm1">changes</span> in level of consciousness and uncontrolled jerking or spastic movements. Notably, there are many pediatric myoclonic and nonepileptic events that have similar signs to seizures. These seizure-like events occur in the absence of an aura or postictal state and have specific clinical clues for differentiation by age and provoking features [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. As the pattern of seizure is specific to its cerebral origin and global effect, the clinical signs of a seizure may have variable expression between patients and may be numerous per patient. The seizure is characterized by its origin, quality, and progression. Seizures can begin as focal cortical amplifications or generalized involving the whole cortex. The seizure itself can produce varying degrees of rhythmic movements, sustained stiffness, or loss of tone or awareness. Additional descriptors detail the seizure progression, to involve other areas of the cortex, and whether the patient’s level of consciousness is impaired. The presentation of a seizure influences the diagnostic modalities including EEG, CT scan, or MRI [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par10">The level of consciousness following anesthesia or sedation may mask clinical and subclinical seizure activity. Physical examination and assessment of vital signs are immediate diagnostic tools that will alert providers to patterns of movement consistent with seizures. Patients emerging from anesthesia and sedation may present with somnolence, disorientation, confusion, and uncontrolled movements of various presentations. This is especially true during stage 2 of an anesthetic wakeup; patient’s present with disconjugate gaze, altered mental status, erratic and obstructive breathing patterns, <span id="ITerm2">and </span>uninhibited movements.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec3"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3 </span>What Initial Steps Should You Perform to Manage Patients Experiencing Convulsive Movements?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par11">Initial steps to manage <span id="ITerm3">convulsive movements</span> and seizures include standard anesthetic practice measures to ensure safety and stability. Strong convulsive movements can have unforeseen and unanticipated harmful effects to a patient. Protect the head and limbs from noxious injury against the stretcher and stretcher rails. Prevent the patient from accidentally dislodging medical devices including monitors, IVs, and oral airways.</p><p class="Para" id="Par12">Acute changes in neurologic function necessitate immediate vital sign assessment and stabilization. This can be achieved with continuous monitoring of oxygen saturation and respiratory rate in addition to visual inspection and auscultation of respiratory dynamics.</p><p class="Para" id="Par13">For <span id="ITerm4">airway management</span>, provide manipulation that maintains airway patency and ensures adequacy of ventilation and oxygenation. Relief of upper airway obstruction can best be performed by head tilt, chin lift, and, if necessary, an oral airway to relieve tongue obstruction. Consider supplementing oxygenation with nasal cannula, non-rebreathers, or supportive mask ventilation. In cases of severe airway obstruction and hypoxia that are not relieved by basic airway maneuvers, measures to place advanced airway techniques (endotracheal tube placement) should be taken.</p><p class="Para" id="Par14">Blood pressure and heart rate management include standard PACU practices. For unstable blood pressures in the setting of rhythm disturbances, CPR protocols should be followed. Management may include chest compressions, cardioversion, defibrillation, fluid resuscitation, and inotrope administration in serial fashion until return of spontaneous circulation. In the setting of stable blood pressures, any arrythmias management should be continued with cardiology consultation.</p><p class="Para" id="Par15"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">The patient’s airway is repositioned to a head tilt position and obstructed patterns of breathing are stabilized. Supplemental oxygen is provided with 6 L/min of mask blow-by. Following repositioning of the airway and supplemental oxygen administration, the patient’s oxygen saturation rises to 98% with a respiratory rate of 20. Blood pressure is 95/45 mmHg and temperature is measured at 36.2</em> °C<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">. The patient continues to have repetitive jerking and spastic limb movements and remains unresponsive for this period now of 2 min.</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par16">Assessment of the patient vital signs shows no fever, normal blood pressure and perfusion state, and normal oxygenation. Delineation based on operative case and perioperative state can delineate reasons for seizure occurrence.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec4"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">4 </span>What Significant Patient Medical History Findings Predispose the Patient to Unprovoked Seizures?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par17">New onset clinical seizures can be either provoked <span id="ITerm5">or</span> unprovoked. <span id="ITerm6">Unprovoked seizures</span> are typically exacerbations of chronic epileptic disease. While the etiology of seizures is difficult to discern in the acute setting, patients with a history of epilepsy may present with postoperative seizures. Seizures in patients with epilepsy may be attributed to perioperative risk factors.</p><p class="Para" id="Par18">History of epilepsy predisposes patients to postoperative seizures. <span id="ITerm7">Epilepsy treatment</span> with antiseizure medications should be routinely continued through the perioperative state, unless indicated by the surgical procedure. In the preoperative period, a thorough review of antiepileptic prescription medication, recent doses, and upcoming scheduled doses can ensure that the patient’s predisposing seizure history is optimized. Review of patient specific seizure characteristics with the patient and family can help clinicians discern seizure activity based on medical history. Adherence to scheduled antiepileptic medications throughout the perioperative period will also decrease the risk of seizure activity. Missed doses within the preoperative period predispose patients with epilepsy to unprovoked postoperative seizures.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec5"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">5 </span>What Intraoperative Events Predispose Pediatric Patients to Seizures in the Postoperative Period?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par19"><span id="ITerm8">Hypoxia</span> predisposes patients to depressed neurologic function and can illicit electrical disturbances in the form of dizziness, altered mentation, seizures, or coma. The pathologic state in which the supply of oxygen is diminished beyond the demand of the brain places risk of prolonged injury to cerebral cells. Patients with prolonged hypoxia due to intraoperative cardiopulmonary failure may present with clinical or subclinical seizures. The occurrence of seizure activity is most appreciated within a week of the neurologic insult. Additionally, hypotension and low perfusion states also can cause severe depression of neurologic function and predispose the patient to seizures [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. As the anesthetic was uncomplicated and there were no reports of hypoxia or hypotension, it is unlikely that this provoked seizures. Furthermore, it is imperative to continue to support cerebral function by maximizing supply and minimizing metabolic demand during a seizure. As such the goals of care are to support the cardiopulmonary system and suppressing seizure activity.</p><p class="Para" id="Par20">In pediatrics, fevers can provoke seizures, most commonly between the ages of 6 months and 5 years old. These <span id="ITerm9">febrile seizures</span> typically present with recurrence and are strongly associated with a rise in temperature and diagnosed when other mechanisms of seizures have been ruled out. In this scenario this is unlikely because the patient is afebrile and has no medical history of triggered seizures with fevers [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec6"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">6 </span>What Laboratory Measurements Will Help Determine the Cause of Seizures?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par21"><span id="ITerm10">Electrolyte abnormalities</span><span id="ITerm11"/> may present initially as seizures. Most commonly sodium, calcium, and magnesium disturbances across the neuronal membranes can cause overactivation and suppression of electrical activity. Seizures present more readily in patients with severe hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia. Clinical causes of these electrolyte disturbances include cardiac, endocrine, and renal disorders in addition to medication side effects. This patient received balanced electrolytes in lactated Ringer’s solution and presented with no medical history that would elevate suspicion for electrolyte abnormalities [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par22"><span id="ITerm12">Hypoglycemia</span> is a major predisposing factor to acute neurologic changes. The degree of hypoglycemia can vary in symptom presentation from dizziness and light headedness to seizures and coma [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec7"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">7 </span>What Predisposing Perioperative Factors Could Lead to Hypoglycemia in the Postoperative Period?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par23">Preoperative fasting <span id="ITerm13">guidelines </span>for pediatric patients limit the oral intake to minimize the chance of severe respiratory complications from aspiration. Prolonged fasting times have often been debated and revolve around patient comfort, aspiration risk, and risk of severe sequelae following aspiration. Current NPO guidelines for pediatric anesthesia recommend stopping all food at 8 h, formula at 6 h, milk at 4 h, and clear liquids at 2 h prior to the procedure. These guidelines have been debated for decades with concern for the low risk of severe pulmonary complications, discomfort for patients, and maintaining oral scheduled medications [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>]. Furthermore, fasting can be lengthened unintentionally as scheduled case may be delayed throughout the course of the operating room day. Prolonged fasting times place patients at risk for undiagnosed intraoperative hypoglycemia. An earlier report in an infant who had seizures perioperatively due to unplanned prolonged fasting of 13 h showed a blood sugar value of 25 mg/dL and was successfully treated with 20 mL of intravenous dextrose 25% [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par24"><span id="ITerm14">Hypoglycemia</span> can also be caused <span id="ITerm15">by </span>preoperative medications administered for disease states. Insulin is a commonly administered medication in the perioperative setting. Any patient taking insulin or diabetic medication should have glucose levels strictly monitored to prevent and treat severe fluctuations. Beta-blocking agents may interfere with glucose transport, but this is seen most commonly in patients requiring insulin treatment. <span id="ITerm16">Propranolol</span> has been found to cause hypoglycemia in infants, but most commonly at higher doses. This population is predisposed to hypoglycemia from low glycogen stores [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>].</p><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par25"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">A blood sample is taken for rapid point-of-care testing, electrolytes are within normal range, and the glucose level is normal, at 89 mg/dL.</em></p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec8"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">8 </span>What Intraoperative Medications Predispose Patients to Seizures in the Postoperative Period?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par26">Several anesthetic <span id="ITerm17">medications</span> predispose patients to seizures. For patient with a history of unprovoked seizures, anesthetics may induce seizures by lowering the threshold. Drugs including local anesthetics, ketamine, etomidate, methohexital, sevoflurane, isoflurane, enflurane, and opioids have all been implicated in provoking seizures. However, EEG evidence of seizure activity in nonepileptic patients is indeterminate for patients receiving opioids, ketamine, and propofol [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>]. Much of the reported seizure activity with induction of anesthesia can be attributed to myoclonic movements, and clinical diagnosis of seizures without EEG testing is not specific.</p><p class="Para" id="Par27">Local anesthetic systemic toxicity <span id="ITerm18">(LAST)</span> exists with absorption in highly vascular areas or inadvertent intravenous injection during regional anesthesia technique. Technique for local anesthetic administration should include intermittent negative blood aspiration and visualization with ultrasound of local anesthetic spread to minimize change of direct intravenous injection. Local anesthetic toxicity can present with neurologic dizziness, confusion, changes in level of consciousness, convulsions, or seizures. Local anesthetics both activate <span id="ITerm19">NMDA receptors</span> and <span id="ITerm20">GABA receptors</span> resulting in an array of dose-dependent severity of clinical presentation. High dose toxicity can present as with cardiac arrythmias, hyper and hypotension, or cardiac arrest [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>]. Maximal dosing for toxicity should be calculated and checked prior to administration; patients most at risk for toxicity are newborns and infants, as well as patients with hepatic and renal impairment. Absorption rates should be considered when placing local anesthetics with caution at highly vascular regions. In decreasing absorption order, those are the intercostal, caudal, brachial plexus, femoral, and subcutaneous areas. Maximal dosing for toxicity should be calculated for direct intravenous local anesthetics for analgesia from intravenous anesthetics. Additionally, the cumulative effect of multiple local anesthetics in different regions can also be toxic. Infants are predisposed to toxicity, likely from low plasma protein levels resulting in an increased free fraction of long-acting local anesthetics [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. As most pediatric regional anesthetic techniques are performed under general anesthesia, the clinical signs of local anesthetic toxicity may be rare.</p><p class="Para" id="Par28"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Review of medications at bedside</em> <span id="ITerm21"/><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">reveals that the patient received 11 mL of 2% ropivacaine for caudal anesthesia, sevoflurane, and 100 mL of intravenous lactated Ringer’s fluid. Localanesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) is suspected, and the lipid emulsion is emergently requisitioned. The patient is monitored for signs of cardiopulmonary instability.</em></p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec9"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">9 </span>What Risks Are Associated with Developing LAST?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par29">The <span id="ITerm22">risk of LAST </span>is dependent on the LA injected, technique used to produce the block, and patient predispositions. Highly lipohilic local anesthetics increase the susceptibility to toxicity, and this is true for bupivacaine. However, newer local anesthetics, ropivacaine and levobupivacaine, were developed to produce the same analgesic potency with fewer cardiotoxic effects, attributed to a lower degree of lipophilicity. Although studies have shown that the clinical safety profile of ropivacaine is superior to levobupivacaine, but it still has potential to produce systemic toxicity at high doses. At present, ropivacaine has the greatest margin of safety of all long-acting local anesthetics [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">12</a></span>]. It is imperative for patient safety that anesthesiologists and recovery room nurses understand the pharmacokinetic mechanisms with which local anesthetics produce local anesthetic systemic toxicity.</p><p class="Para" id="Par30">The vascular supply to the site and the total amount of <span id="ITerm23">local anesthetic (LA)</span> determine the peak plasma concentration and systemic absorption and potential for toxicity. It is the free unbound LA presented to an organ that determines the clinical and toxic effects. Organs with higher percentage of perfusion, namely, the brain, heart, and liver, receive a higher proportion of unbound LA relative to poorly perfused organs. The poorly protein bound amino ester (procaine and chloroprocaine) have higher peak plasma concentrations as compared to aminoamide LAs (lidocaine, bupivacaine, ropivacaine) which are highly protein bound to alpha-<span class="EmphasisTypeSmallCaps ">l</span>-acid glycoprotein. With regard to metabolism, the amino ester LAs undergo rapid hydrolysis by plasma cholinesterase, while amino amide LAs undergo a <span id="ITerm24"/>lengthier enzymatic metabolism by the hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes increasing the exposure and potential for toxicity.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec10"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">10 </span>What Cerebral Nervous and Cardiovascular Signs Are Characteristic in LAST?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par31">All local anesthetics can produce <span id="ITerm25"/>LAST. The ideal dose of LA that should be utilized is the lowest dose that achieves the desired degree of analgesia. In adult studies 40% of LAST cases had an atypical presentation [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>]. Seizures are the most common severe CNS presentation of LAST (68–77%) [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>]. Awake adult patients have described perioral numbness, agitation, confusion, audio, and visual disturbances. As the quantity of LA in plasma increases, the cortical inhibitory pathways are regulated by blocked sodium channels which compromise regulatory inhibitory depolarization. Clinically, this can manifest in an awake patient as sensory and visual changes, muscle contractions, and seizures. Further rise in LA in plasma disrupts the excitatory neuronal pathways resulting in loss of consciousness, coma, and respiratory arrest. Adult studies have shown that one third of the reported cases of LAST began with neurological signs followed by manifestations of cardiac abnormalities like rhythm disturbances and one fifth presented with cardiac arrhythmias [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par32">LA blockage of sodium channels <span id="ITerm26">impairs</span> normal cardiac conduction by affecting the bundle of His producing rhythm disturbances. Decrease in the propagation of action potential from LA induces ECG changes that include prolongation of PR, QRS, and ST intervals and result in tachyarrhythmias and bradyarrhythmias. QT interval prolongation by potassium channel blockade can exacerbate the rhythm disturbances. In addition, the blockade of sodium, calcium, and potassium exchange transporters reduces intracellular calcium for adequate cardiac contractility [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec11"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">11 </span>What Are the Phases of LAST?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par33">Patients who develop <span id="ITerm27">LAST</span> present with a biphasic clinical picture, initial neurologic excitement followed by inhibition. Cardiovascular effects can begin with dysrhythmias, myocardial depression, decreased contractility, and systemic vascular resistance [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>]. The ratio of local anesthetic dose required to cause cardiovascular collapse (CC) to the drug dose required to cause seizures (CN) is known as the CC/CN ratio, and a low CC/CCN ratio translates to a more potent cardiotoxic drug, and those with a higher CC/CN ratio, namely, ropivacaine and levobupivacaine, have a greater safety margin. Local anesthetics also have intrinsic vasoactive properties that may prolong their duration and slow systemic absorption [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">16</a></span>]. A review of published reports of LAST over 30 years concluded that only 60% of cases followed the classic clinical pattern of progressive worsening of neurologic symptoms of seizures and coma followed by hemodynamic instability and cardiovascular collapse. Forty percent of the cases exhibited only cardiovascular collapse without evidence of CNS symptoms [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">17</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec12"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">12 </span>How Do You Reduce the Risk of LAST?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par34">Preventing LAST can best <span id="ITerm28">be</span> done by maintaining periprocedural safety routines when using local anesthetics. Several systems and individual best practice techniques in regional and local anesthetic can ensure patient safety. These best practices start with calculation and checking the total local anesthetic dose and total drug daily dose based on kilogram weight of the patient. Additionally, administering a regional and neuraxial anesthetic block comes with avoidance of vascular puncture by way of ultrasound avoided vascular injury and frequent aspiration during placement of local anesthetic. Epinephrine doses have been used to prolong the duration of the block and indicate early vascular puncture; doses range from 1:200,000 to 1:400,000. Characteristic t-wave morphologies present early in vascular injection and resolve quickly but can help alert the practitioner to LAST.</p><p class="Para" id="Par35">Ultrasound-guided neuraxial and regional anesthesia are gaining popularity because of the ease of obtaining adequate visual field, avoiding vascular and neuronal injury, and high success rates with local anesthetic placement. In infants and small children, the visualization of the caudal space, ability to measure the distance of the epidural space from the skin in the viewed image, and seeing the widening or distension of the epidural space caused by the drug injected are helpful predictors of successful caudal puncture and administration of the local anesthetic drug [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">18</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par36">Repeated exposure to local anesthetics during the procedure can further exacerbate the toxic dose. Avoidance of redosing neuraxial and regional anesthetics for prolongation of blockade reduces the risk of toxicity. Repeated failed attempts <span id="ITerm29"/>at neuraxial techniques increase the risk of complications including nerve injury, hematoma, and vascular injection. In circumstances when the caudal block is difficult or requires repeated attempts, an effort should be made to abandon the block for alternative analgesic modalities, including the dorsal penile nerve block.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec13"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">13 </span>What Is the Treatment for Patients with Suspected LAST?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par37">In <span id="ITerm30">suspected local anesthetic toxicity</span>, total dose and amount of different local anesthetics should be confirmed. Local anesthetic boluses and infusions should be discontinued immediately. Treatment begins based on symptomatology. Mild symptoms of dizziness, light headedness, twitching, and tinnitus can resolve without intervention. These symptoms must be watched closely for progression of toxicity in the post-anesthesia care unit. Treatment of severe local anesthesia toxicity follows the <span id="ITerm31">Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS)</span> standards for cardiopulmonary resuscitation. This includes respiratory support, control of arrythmias, volume resuscitation, medication administration, and chest compressions when indicated. In the case of ventricular arrythmias, amiodarone is recommended over lidocaine. Additionally, <span id="ITerm32">vasopressin</span>, <span id="ITerm33">calcium channel blockers</span>, and <span id="ITerm34">beta blockers</span> should be avoided during resuscitation.</p><p class="Para" id="Par38">Severe central nervous system local anesthetic toxicity presents as tonic-clinic seizures, unresponsiveness, and coma. Treatment of seizures revolves around suppression of excitatory neuronal pathways with benzodiazepines and intravenous anesthetics. Midazolam and lorazepam can be used to treat the active seizure in local anesthetic toxicity [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec14"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">14 </span>What Is Lipid Emulsion Therapy for the Treatment of LAST?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par39"><span id="ITerm35">Treatment </span><span id="ITerm36"/>of severe local anesthetics toxicity includes lipid emulsion therapy. The proposed mechanism is inactivation by lipid sink and lipid shuttle of local anesthetics. The lipid sink mechanism of action is reabsorption of lipophilic form of local anesthetic from vascular-rich organs into the plasma followed by lipid shuttle and redistribution of local anesthetics to the muscles and liver. Additional protective mechanisms of lipid emulsion therapy are proposed to include improved systemic vascular resistance, enhanced contractility, and increased preload by volume expansion. It is also postulated that lipid emulsion therapy mitigates ischemia-induced cardiovascular biochemical and cellular changes.</p><p class="Para" id="Par40"><span id="ITerm37">Lipid emulsion formulations</span> are offered as 20% lipid emulsions with mixed long-chain and medium-chain fatty acids. <span id="ITerm38">Propofol</span> is a 10% lipid emulsion and is not a suitable substitute for lipid emulsion therapy; in addition, the cardiovascular depressant effects of propofol should warrant exclusion from its administration in the setting of LAST [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">19</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par41">The initial intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) therapy is 1.5 mL of 20% lipid solution administered over 2 min for patients less than 70 kgs. This is then followed by a continuous infusion of 0.25 mL/kg/min. Repeated boluses and continuation of infusion may be necessary if continuous cardiopulmonary resuscitation efforts were required [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. The recommend maximum dose is 12 mL/kg.</p><p class="Para" id="Par42">Although rare, side effects of <span id="ITerm39">ILE</span><span id="ITerm40"/> include allergic reaction (severe egg allergy), hyperlipidemia, and hypercoagulability. These side effects should not withstand early and definitive treatment for the patient with local anesthetic toxicity but should be recognized and not withstanding of appropriate treatment of LAST. Toxicity of ILE presents with hypertriglyceridemia, liver dysfunction, acute pancreatitis, and acute kidney injury and is more common in high-dose lipid emulsion therapy or impaired lipid metabolism and storage.</p><p class="Para" id="Par43">In the treatment of cardiovascular collapse from LAST, <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">local anesthetics for ventricular arrythmias are strictly prohibited. Amiodarone is the preferred antiarrhythmic medication. In addition, low doses of epinephrine are preferred as higher doses impair lipid therapy. Epinephrine doses exceeding 10mcg/kg have detrimental effects to increasing lactate and worsen metabolic acidosis. Vasopressin, calcium channel blockers, and betablockers should also be avoided.</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par44"><span id="ITerm41">Intravenous lipid emulsions</span> have been used to treat other life-threatening lipophilic drug toxicities in children with beneficial outcomes. These drugs include amitriptyline, diltiazem, bupropion, dosulepin, lamotrigine, quetiapine, and verapamil [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">20</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">21</a></span>]. A recent practical guide for the management of systemic toxicity by local anesthetics published by the Japanese society of anesthesiologist is a helpful tool to follow for all anesthesiologists who perform nerve blocks [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">22</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par45"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Following the administration of 2 mg of midazolam and 1.5 mL of 20% lipid solution administered over 2 min, the patient’s convulsive</em><span id="ITerm42"/><span id="ITerm43"/> <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">activity is suppressed. The patient’s vital signs are within normal limits and the patient is waking up but drowsy and uncomfortable. The patient is admitted to ICU for monitoring overnight and continued neurologic evaluation.</em></p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec15"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">15 </span>Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par46">Local anesthetic systemic toxicity is a potentially lethal condition. The prevention, clinical presentation, and management of LAST should be appreciated by the clinician and recovery team. Ultrasound-guided regional and neuraxial technique, correct drug calculations, and avoidance of vascular injection are best ways to mitigate LAST. Additionally, recovery room personnel and providing clinicians should have a sound understanding of the local anesthetic drug characteristics, markers of toxicity, and therapies for LAST. Timely administration of ILE for immediate treatment of LAST improves morbidity and mortality. ILE therapy requires dose calculation and administration by trained professionals. Resuscitation from LAST with advanced life support skills should include maintaining adequacy of ventilation and oxygenation, maintaining cardiovascular stability, correction of abnormal laboratory values, and treatment of seizures. LAST requires post-resuscitation continuous monitoring in an intensive care setting and stabilization. With the advent of ILE therapy, successful resuscitation from LAST has become possible. Maintaining a high level of clinical suspicion and ability to treat LAST promptly can be lifesaving.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">1.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Fine A, Wirrell EC. Seizures in children. Pediatr Rev. 2020;41(7):321–47. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.2019-0134"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1542/​pir.​2019-0134</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/pir.2019-0134"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32611798"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">2.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Fisher RS, et al. Operational classification of seizure types by the International League Against Epilepsy: Position Paper of the ILAE Commission for Classification and Terminology. Epilepsia. 2017;58(4):522–30.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.13670"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28276060"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">3.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Zhou KQ, McDouall A, Drury PP, Lear CA, Cho KHT, Bennet L, Gunn AJ, Davidson JO. Treating seizures after hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy-current controversies and future directions. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22(13):7121. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22137121"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​ijms22137121</span></a></span>. PMID: 34281174; PMCID: PMC8268683<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms22137121"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34281174"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8268683"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">4.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Nardone R, Brigo F, Trinka E. Acute symptomatic seizures caused by electrolyte disturbances. J Clin Neurol. 2016;12(1):21–33. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3988/jcn.2016.12.1.21"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​3988/​jcn.​2016.​12.​1.​21</span></a></span>. PMID: 26754778; PMCID: PMC4712283<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3988/jcn.2016.12.1.21"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26754778"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">5.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Imad H, Zelano J, Kumlien E. Hypoglycemia, and risk of seizures: a retrospective cross-sectional study. Seizure. 2015;25:147–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2014.10.005"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​seizure.​2014.​10.​005</span></a></span>. Epub 2014 Oct 17. Erratum in: Seizure. 2017; 45:132. Johan, Zelano [corrected to Zelano, Johan]; Eva, Kumlien [corrected to Kumlien, Eva]. PMID: 25455725<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seizure.2014.10.005"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25455725"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">6.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Fawcett WJ, Thomas M. Pre-operative fasting in adults and children: clinical practice and guidelines. Anaesthesia. 2019;74(1):83–8. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.14500"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​anae.​14500</span></a></span>. Epub 2018 Nov 30. PMID: 30500064<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.14500"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30500064"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">7.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Maze A, Samuels SI. Hypoglycemia-induced seizures in an infant during anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 1980;52:77. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-198001000-00017"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​00000542-198001000-00017</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-198001000-00017"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=7352650"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">8.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Holland KE, Frieden IJ, Frommelt PC, Mancini AJ, Wyatt D, Drolet BA. Hypoglycemia in children taking propranolol for the treatment of infantile hemangioma. Arch Dermatol. 2010;146(7):775–8. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/archdermatol.2010.158"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1001/​archdermatol.​2010.​158</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1001/archdermatol.2010.158"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20644039"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">9.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Voss LJ, Sleigh JW, Barnard JP, Kirsch HE. The howling cortex: seizures and general anesthetic drugs. Anesth Analg. 2008;107(5):1689–703. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ane.0b013e3181852595"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1213/​ane.​0b013e3181852595​</span></a></span>. PMID: 18931234<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ane.0b013e3181852595"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=18931234"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">10.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Dontukurthy S, Tobias JD. Update on local anesthetic toxicity, prevention and treatment during regional anesthesia in infants and children. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2021;26(5):445–54. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.5863/1551-6776-26.5.445"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​5863/​1551-6776-26.​5.​445</span></a></span>. Epub 2021 Jun 28. PMID: 34239395; PMCID: PMC8244955<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.5863/1551-6776-26.5.445"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34239395"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8244955"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">11.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Lönnqvist PA. Toxicity of local anesthetic drugs: a pediatric perspective. Paediatr Anaesth. 2012;22(1):39–43. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9592.2011.03631.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1460-9592.​2011.​03631.​x</span></a></span>. Epub 2011 Jun 14. PMID: 21672079<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-9592.2011.03631.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=21672079"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">12.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Zink W, Graf BM. The toxicity of local anesthetics: the place of ropivacaine and levobupivacaine. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol. 2008;21(5):645–50. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ACO.0b013e32830c214c"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​ACO.​0b013e32830c214c​</span></a></span>. PMID: 18784493<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ACO.0b013e32830c214c"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=18784493"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">13.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Neal JM, Bernards CM, Butterworth JF 4th, Di Gregorio G, Drasner K, Hejtmanek MR, Mulroy MF, Rosenquist RW, Weinberg GL. ASRA practice advisory on local anesthetic systemic toxicity. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35(2):152–61. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/AAP.0b013e3181d22fcd"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​AAP.​0b013e3181d22fcd​</span></a></span>. PMID: 20216033<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/AAP.0b013e3181d22fcd"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20216033"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">14.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">El-Boghdadly K, Chin KJ. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: continuing professional development. Can J Anaesth. 2016;63(3):330–49. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-015-0564-z"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s12630-015-0564-z</span></a></span>. Epub 2016 Jan 29. PMID: 26830640<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s12630-015-0564-z"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26830640"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">15.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Gitman M, Barrington MJ. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a review of recent case reports and registries. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2018;43(2):124–30. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/AAP.0000000000000721"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​AAP.​0000000000000721​</span></a></span>. PMID: 29303925<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/AAP.0000000000000721"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29303925"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">16.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">El-Boghdadly K, Pawa A, Chin KJ. Local anesthetic systemic toxicity: current perspectives. Local Reg Anesth. 2018;11:35–44. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/LRA.S154512"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​2147/​LRA.​S154512</span></a></span>. PMID: 30122981; PMCID: PMC6087022<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/LRA.S154512"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30122981"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6087022"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">17.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Di Gregorio G, Neal JM, Rosenquist RW, Weinberg GL. Clinical presentation of local anesthetic systemic toxicity: a review of published cases, 1979 to 2009. Reg Anesth Pain Med. 2010;35(2):181–7. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/aap.0b013e3181d2310b"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​aap.​0b013e3181d2310b​</span></a></span>. PMID: 20301824<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/aap.0b013e3181d2310b"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20301824"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">18.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Kil HK. Caudal and epidural blocks in infants and small children: historical perspective and ultrasound-guided approaches. Korean J Anesthesiol. 2018;71(6):430–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4097/kja.d.18.00109"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​4097/​kja.​d.​18.​00109</span></a></span>. Epub 2018 Aug 8. PMID: 30086609; PMCID: PMC6283718<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4097/kja.d.18.00109"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30086609"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6283718"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">19.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Ok SH, Hong JM, Lee SH, Sohn JT. Lipid emulsion for treating local anesthetic systemic toxicity. Int J Med Sci. 2018;15(7):713–22. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.7150/ijms.22643"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​7150/​ijms.​22643</span></a></span>. PMID: 29910676; PMCID: PMC6001420<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.7150/ijms.22643"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29910676"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6001420"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">20.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Presley JD, Chyka PA. Intravenous lipid emulsion to reverse acute drug toxicity in pediatric patients. Ann Pharmacother. 2013;47(5):735–43. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1345/aph.1R666"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1345/​aph.​1R666</span></a></span>. Epub 2013 Apr 23. PMID: 23613099<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1345/aph.1R666"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23613099"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">21.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Havan M, Kendirli T, Özcan S, Doğan MT, Yiğit AO, Uçar T. A successful treatment with intravenous lipid emulsion therapy in a child with verapamil poisoning. Turk J Emerg Med. 2021;21(4):217–20. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4103/2452-2473.329626"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​4103/​2452-2473.​329626</span></a></span>. PMID: 34849436; PMCID: PMC8593422<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4103/2452-2473.329626"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34849436"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8593422"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">22.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Safety Committee of Japanese Society of Anesthesiologists. Practical guide for the management of systemic toxicity caused by local anesthetics. J Anesth. 2019;33(1):1–8. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00540-018-2542-4"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00540-018-2542-4</span></a></span>. Epub 2018 Nov 11. PMID: 30417244<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00540-018-2542-4"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li></ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>