<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Emergence Delirium in a Toddler</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-3-031-24396-7_4"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">S. T. Verghese<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Anesthesia STAT!  Acute Pediatric Emergencies in PACU</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_4">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_4</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">Emergence Delirium in a Toddler</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Chaitanya Challa</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Chaitanya Challa</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:CChalla@childrensnational.org">CChalla@childrensnational.org</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Emergence delirium</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Rapid awakening</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">PAED scale</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Anxiety</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Dexmedetomidine</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><p class="Para" id="Par2">A full-term healthy 3-year-old male 18 kg patient presented for an elective circumcision. At the age of 9 months, he had bilateral myringotomy and tube placements under anesthesia without any issues. There are no history of allergies and no significant family history of issues under anesthesia. Patient had premedication with midazolam (0.5 mg/kg) in the preoperative setting, as his parents stated he would become anxious prior to induction. He had a mask induction, and his airway was managed by an LMA which was placed after an intravenous line was secured. This was followed by an uneventful injection of 10 cc of ropivacaine 0.2% via the caudal space after sterile preparation of the caudal area while the patient was in the lateral position. Caudal anesthesia is very useful for providing pain relief during and after the surgery as well as decreasing the use of narcotics intraoperatively. The duration of surgery was 30 min and the patient’s LMA was removed deep while he was still anesthetized, and then he was taken to PACU. About 15 min later, the patient woke up combative, attempting to rip off the intravenous line, screaming, and unable to be calmed down. The parents who were at the bedside and the PACU nurse are now unable to calm him and attempt to hold him from hurting himself. You are called back to de-escalate this erratic behavior of the 3-year-old young boy!</p><p class="Para ParaOneEmphasisChild" id="Par3"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Could he be in pain? Was the caudal block effective? “Are you sure?”, the mother asks. “He may be in pain,” she says.</strong></p><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">1 </span>What Is the <span id="ITerm1">Differential Diagnosis</span> for This Behavior?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par4">First it is important to rule out that he is not in pain from the surgical incision and bladder distention and fear of waking up alone in a new place without his parents. Since he had an excellent effect from the caudal anesthesia during surgery and he had peed after the surgery, we can safely rule out the first two possibilities. Since his parents are both near him and are attempting to hold him, the third possibility is also ruled out. Lastly, consider emergence delirium or agitation as a diagnosis of exclusion [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par5">The first thing to do in this scenario is to ask for an alcohol wipe and inject 1–2 mg per kilogram of propofol and explain to the parents that what you are doing is to help the patient go back to sleep. Once he is asleep <span id="ITerm2">lying</span> on his side, with stable vital signs and oxygen blow-by near his face via a face mask, you can direct your attention to the distressed parents and explain the problem of emergence delirium. You explain that this is a common problem in young children and that he should be waking up much better after the effect of the propofol has worn out. It is only after administering the intravenous propofol treatment that you can explain to the parents the phenomenon of emergence delirium in children which they witnessed in their son. They might <span id="ITerm3">ask</span> you if he will wake up again and exhibit the same distress as he showed on first emergence. If the heart rate is high, then additional drugs like dexmedetomidine in small doses may be titrated to prolong the sleep and allow slow wake up with parents by his bedside.</p><p class="Para" id="Par6">The father then asks the question as to why his son was not given this same drug at the end of the case if this phenomenon is known to occur in PACU. Your thoughtful and insightful response at this time includes that not all patients display this behavior and that you would have proactively given the drug if there was a history of emergence delirium in the past after placement of bilateral ear tubes. You <span id="ITerm4">also</span> emphasize that you are very glad that he raised this question because since this was his second anesthetic and he woke up with delirium, it is important to mention this phenomenon to the future anesthesiologist. The anesthesiologist then can give these drugs prophylactically to slow his wake up in PACU and avoid emergence delirium after the surgical procedure. It is also important to mention that additional drugs can indeed delay emergence and <span id="ITerm5">discharge,</span> and that is why it is not given to all children at a certain age to treat anticipated delirium. In about 35 min, the patient wakes up and looks happy to see his parents and begins to play with his toy. He is smiling and drinking apple juice when you see him again, and the parents are very grateful for his smooth wake up a second time. You reiterate to the parents that they mention this incident to the next anesthesiologist and request the need for <span id="ITerm6">premedication</span> if he is anxious before surgery again and the need for additional dose of propofol or dexmedetomidine prior to emergence. You can give them a piece of paper to describe his emergence delirium incident after circumcision and recommend that he may benefit from premedication as well as preventive measures against delirium prior to emergence.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2 </span>What Is Emergence Delirium and What Are Its Risk Factors?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par7"><span id="ITerm7">Emergence delirium (ED)</span> is a state of restlessness, agitation, hyperactivity, and confusion in patients after an anesthetic procedure [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. It was first described in the 1960s when Dr. Eckenhoff’s team at the University of Pennsylvania reviewed the records of 14,436 patients over 4 years [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. They noted, at that time, that a higher <span id="ITerm8">risk</span> of emergence delirium exists with younger children, with the specific type of procedure and the temperament of the patient playing a contributing role. The patient may be combative, pulling out intravenous lines and patient monitor accessories, removing dressings, and attempting to cause harm to themselves or their caretakers with sudden movements using their torso, head, and limbs.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec3"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3 </span>Are There Specific <span id="ITerm9">Factors</span> That Can Predict ED in Children?</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3.1 </span>Risk Factors for Emergence Delirium</h3><p class="Para" id="Par8">The earliest <span id="ITerm10">reports</span> of emergence delirium indicate a relation to head and neck surgeries, as patient’s wake up with a feeling of strangulation.</p><div class="Para" id="Par9">The primary <span id="ITerm11">risk factors</span> include: [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]<div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par10">Patient age between 2 and 6 years</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par11">Head, neck, and throat surgery</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par12">Inhalational anesthesia</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par13">Male gender</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par14">Preoperative anxiety</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par15">Parental anxiety</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par16">Child’s temperament (nervous, anxious)</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par17">Rapid awakening from anesthesia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]</p></li></ul></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par18">Emergence delirium usually starts about 5–10 min after emergence and can last up to 45 min. It is important to remember that usually emergence delirium does not recur once it has resolved [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec5"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">4 </span>What <span id="ITerm12">Clinical Measurement Tools</span> Are Used to Assess Emergence Delirium?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par19">The <span id="ITerm13"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">Pediatric Anesthesia Emergence Delirium (PAED) scale</em></span> is the most commonly used diagnostic tool in children between the ages of 18 months and 6 years of age. [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>]</p><div class="Para" id="Par20">The child is evaluated against the five questions in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">1</a></span> and the point values associated with each answer are aggregated. The higher the score, the more likely the child has emergence delirium [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>]. The scale has a maximum score of 20 and a score greater than 12 is indicative of emergence delirium. Postoperatively, the FLACC scale (Face, Leg, Activity, Cry, Consolability scale) and the PAED scale can be used to help differentiate pain from emergence delirium [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>].<div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 1</span><p class="SimplePara">The pediatric anesthesia emergence delirium <span id="ITerm14">scale</span></p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/><col class="tcol4 align-left"/><col class="tcol5 align-left"/><col class="tcol6 align-left"/><col class="tcol7 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Point</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Description</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Not at all</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Just a little</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Quite a bit</p></th><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Very much</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Extremely</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The child makes eye contact with the caregiver</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">0</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The child’s actions are purposeful</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">0</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The child is aware of his/her surroundings</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">0</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The child is restless</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">0</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">5</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">The child is inconsolable</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">0</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec6"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">5 </span>Which Types of Anesthesia Increase the Risk of Emergence Delirium?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par21">Inhalational anesthesia, specifically sevoflurane, has been known to have the highest incidence of emergence delirium.</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">5.1 </span>Volatile Anesthetics</h3><p class="Para" id="Par22">Inhalational <span id="ITerm15">anesthetics</span><span id="ITerm16"/><span id="ITerm17"/> have been used for more than 150 years in pediatrics. Sevoflurane, one of the most popular inhalation anesthetics used today, was developed in Japan in 1992 and became available worldwide in 1995. Several studies have demonstrated that the rapid wake up with the use of sevoflurane in the pediatric population has increased the incidence of emergence delirium. [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>] In a study comparing sevoflurane with halothane published by T. Foesel, it was evident that sevoflurane had significantly more post behavioral changes despite the type of induction, pain therapy, or surgery [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>]. Although all inhalational agents can cause emergence delirium, sevoflurane has the highest propensity. Interestingly, Driscoll et al. compared children undergoing ENT procedures using desflurane and <span id="ITerm18">sevoflurane</span><span id="ITerm19"/> and did not see a significant difference in the rate of ED. [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>] Cohen et al. reported that children undergoing general anesthesia with desflurane exhibited shorter recovery time but had similar emergence delirium as the patients with sevoflurane [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">5.2 </span>General Anesthesia Vs. Total Intravenous Anesthesia (TIVA)</h3><p class="Para" id="Par23">In a study comparing the use of sevoflurane and <span id="ITerm20">TIVA</span> on dental patients between the ages of 3 and 7 years, Kocaturk and Keles found that there was a lower incidence of emergence delirium in the TIVA group as well as higher patient and parent satisfaction [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par24">Chandler et al. studied the rate of emergence delirium in 112 children undergoing strabismus surgery with inhalational versus intravenous anesthesia and noted a reduction in emergence delirium in the TIVA group (propofol and remifentanil) compared to sevoflurane, as well as a reduction in pain score. [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec9"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">6 </span>What Treatments and Preventative Measures Are Available for Emergence Delirium?</h2><p class="Para" id="Par25">Emergence delirium will typically <span id="ITerm21">self-resolve</span>; however there are pharmacological and non-pharmacological techniques that can be utilized for treatment and prevention.</p><p class="Para" id="Par26">At low doses, propofol has been demonstrated to reduce the risk of emergence delirium [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">12</a></span>]. The drug has several mechanisms of action, including binding to GABA(A) receptors, thereby inhibiting the release of acetylcholine, causing sedative effects [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>]. Its fast onset of action and short half-life make it very appealing to use in the pediatric ambulatory setting. Clearance for <span id="ITerm22">propofol</span> is mostly through the liver, but due to the extreme speed of metabolism, there is evidence to suggest that it is also metabolized outside of the hepatic system. In addition to reducing the risk of emergence delirium, several studies have reported that propofol at low doses (such as 1 mg/kg at the conclusion of the case) can also cut down the rate of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV) without increasing PACU recovery time [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par27"><span id="ITerm23">Dexmedetomidine</span> has been used as an agent to help aid in reducing the rates of emergence delirium under general anesthesia with sevoflurane. Dexmedetomidine is a selective adrenoceptor alpha 2 agonist that is used for its anxiolytic, sedative, and analgesic properties [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>]. It works by binding to alpha 2 receptors in the locus coeruleus of the pons causing sedation and in the dorsal horns of the spinal cord to improve analgesia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">16</a></span>]. Side effects of <span id="ITerm24">dexmedetomidine</span> include bradycardia and hypotension. Mengzhu Shi et al. conducted a double-blind study comparing children undergoing tonsillectomy with or without the use of dexmedetomidine (0.5 mcg/kg) after induction. Significant reduction in emergence delirium was noted in the group receiving dexmedetomidine; however a longer time to extubation and discharge from PACU was observed [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">17</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par28"><span id="ITerm25">Dexmedetomidine</span> can be used as a premedication and for reducing emergence delirium. Yao et al. studied the effects of intranasal dexmedetomidine vs. oral midazolam, noting a decrease in emergence delirium, improvement in patient satisfaction, and reduction in PONV in the group with dexmedetomidine [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">18</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par29">Tan et al. conducted a meta-analysis which demonstrated that sevoflurane in combination with dexmedetomidine, ketamine, <span id="ITerm26">fentanyl</span>, propofol, sufentanil, remifentanil, and clonidine were synergistic in reducing the incidence of emergence delirium for pediatric ophthalmic surgery. <span id="ITerm27">Dexmedetomidine</span> was proven to be superior to all others in reducing the risk of emergence delirium with the least side effects [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">19</a></span>]. In a study by Song et al., it was shown that dexmedetomidine reduced emergence delirium without increasing the oculo-cardiac reflex <span id="ITerm28">although</span> the mechanism is still unclear. The additional benefit noted in this meta-analysis result was that dexmedetomidine infusion could reduce the risk of post-op nausea and vomiting and opioid consumption [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">20</a></span>].</p><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec10"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">6.1 </span>Fentanyl/<span id="ITerm29">Ketamine</span> and Regional <span id="ITerm30">Anesthesia</span></h3><p class="Para" id="Par30">Emergence delirium can occur despite pain after inhalational and intravenous anesthesia. A risk factor for emergence <span id="ITerm31">delirium</span> can be postoperative pain control, but the use of <span id="ITerm32">fentanyl</span>, opioids, or <span id="ITerm33">regional anesthesia</span> techniques can be used to reduce the risk of agitation after anesthesia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par31">Kim et al. performed a meta-analysis on the effects of <span id="ITerm34">fentanyl</span> on emergence delirium which demonstrated that it could reduce the risk of agitation if given 10–20 min before the conclusion of anesthesia. If given at the end of the case, it can increase PACU recovery time, respiratory depression, and postoperative nausea and vomiting [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">21</a></span>]. Intravenous and intranasal (IN) <span id="ITerm35">fentanyl</span> have been proven to reduce the rate of emergence delirium in ophthalmologic and ENT procedures, but it has been associated with respiratory depression.</p><p class="Para" id="Par32">Children receiving a caudal block after anesthesia had reduced rates of emergence delirium and pain in the PACU. [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">22</a></span>] Aouad, in his double-blind prospective study on children undergoing inguinal hernia with caudal anesthesia vs. IV <span id="ITerm36">fentanyl</span>, noted a significant reduction in agitation in the group receiving caudal anesthesia only. Similarly, peripheral nerve blocks can be helpful to reduce pain as well as emergence delirium. Kim et al. studied the <span id="ITerm37">effects</span> of fascia iliaca nerve blocks on emergence agitation in children undergoing orthopedic surgery. Agitation scores using the PAED scale were far higher in the group that did not receive the fascia iliaca nerve block [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR23" role="doc-biblioref">23</a></span>].<span id="ITerm38"/></p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec11"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">7 </span>What Are Some of the Non-pharmacological Techniques to Reduce ED?</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec12"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">7.1 </span>Non-pharmacological Techniques</h3><p class="Para" id="Par33">Anxiety has a strong correlation to postoperative <span id="ITerm39">complications</span> such as emergence delirium and negative behavior up to 1 week after surgery. Kim et al. demonstrated in a study of 100 preschoolers ages 2–7 years undergoing elective surgery that those who were diagnosed with emergence delirium had higher incidences of preoperative anxiety and postoperative behavioral changes up to 1 week after surgery [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR24" role="doc-biblioref">24</a></span>]. Behavioral changes can include sleep disturbances, enuresis, poor appetite, and tantrums. As they did not complete a long-term follow-up, it is unclear how long these behavioral changes can persist after surgery. It is important for healthcare providers to inform families of the risk associated with negative behavior after anesthesia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par34">Involving child life specialists to engage <span id="ITerm40">children</span> in lessening their anxiety may help them to participate in the induction of anesthesia if parents are not able to accompany them. Virtual reality (VR) provides a unique opportunity to gradually expose children to all aspects of the operating theater. Virtual reality exposure (VRE) is available now and may become a remarkable tool to help relax anxious children who are uncomfortable with new surroundings by preparing them psychologically for surgery. Ryu et al. studied whether virtual reality tours in children would reduce anxiety and/or post-op behavioral changes. In the final analysis, it was clearly illustrated that preoperative VR tours were helpful to alleviate preoperative anxiety for patients undergoing surgery; however they did not result in a reduction in emergence delirium [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR25" role="doc-biblioref">25</a></span>].<span id="ITerm41"/></p><p class="Para" id="Par35">Monochromatic blue light (MBL) is yet another non-pharmacologic method that was found to reduce the incidence of emergence delirium and PAED scores in children [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">26</a></span>]. Monochromatic light is associated with wakefulness and alertness, reduced reaction times, and enhanced cognition. In Adler’s study it was evident that patients waking up after adenotonsillectomy with monochromatic light had reduced emergence delirium post-sevoflurane general anesthesia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR26" role="doc-biblioref">26</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par36">Martin et al. studied EEG patterns in children undergoing <span id="ITerm42">surgery</span> and compared it to those with emergence delirium. Results demonstrated an increase in frontal lobe network connectivity preceding emergence delirium after sevoflurane use [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR27" role="doc-biblioref">27</a></span>]. This correlates with an hyperexcitable cortical activity to internal and external stimuli.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec13"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">7.2 </span>Hypoactive Delirium</h3><div class="Para" id="Par37">Children can present with <span id="ITerm43">hyperactive, hypoactive, or mixed delirium</span><span id="ITerm44"/>. Patients with hypoactive delirium appear similarly to hyperactive patients in having confusion and disorientation and not making eye contact. However, they make minimal movements and do not respond to any social interactions [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR28" role="doc-biblioref">28</a></span>]. Similar to how the PAED scale is used to assess hyperactive delirium after anesthesia, the Cornell Assessment of Pediatric Delirium, shown in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">2</a></span>, can be helpful to assess hypoactive delirium [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">20</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR29" role="doc-biblioref">29</a></span>]. Hypoactive delirium is exceedingly rare after anesthesia; however it’s important to evaluate if this phenomenon is present after a postoperative encounter in a child who seems unable to respond to social interactions.<span id="ITerm45"/><span id="ITerm46"/><div class="Table" id="Tab2"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 2</span><p class="SimplePara">Cornell assessment of pediatric delirium revised</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/><col class="tcol3 align-left"/><col class="tcol4 align-left"/><col class="tcol5 align-left"/><col class="tcol6 align-left"/><col class="tcol7 align-left"/></colgroup><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Never</p><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Rarely</p><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sometimes</p><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Often</p><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Always</p><p class="SimplePara">0</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Score</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1. Does the child make eye contact with the caregiver?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">2. Are the child’s actions purposeful?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3. Is the child aware of his/her surroundings?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">4. Does the child communicate needs and wants?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Never</p><p class="SimplePara">0</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Rarely</p><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sometimes</p><p class="SimplePara">2</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Often</p><p class="SimplePara">3</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Always</p><p class="SimplePara">4</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Score</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">5. Is the child restless?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">6. Is the child inconsolable?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">7. Is the child underactive—very little movement while awake?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">8. Does it take the child a long time to respond to interactions?</p></td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"> </td></tr><tr><td colspan="6" style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Total</strong></p></td><td style="text-align: left;"> </td></tr></tbody></table><div class="TableFooter"><p class="SimplePara"><em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">RASS</em> Richmond Agitation and Sedation Scale</p></div></div></div></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec14"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">8 </span>Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par38">Clinical signs of emergence delirium include disorientation sometimes accompanied by aggressive behavior, usually occurring within 5–15 min after anesthesia has ended. Emergence delirium (ED) is a diagnosis of exclusion, and it’s important to first rule out bladder distension, gastric distension due to air trapping (occurring during mask anesthesia), and incisional pain. ED is now more common with the increased use of inhalational agents with low blood-gas solubility coefficient such as sevoflurane and desflurane, which lead to a rapid emergence in children. Some key risk factors associated with emergence delirium are preschool age, head and neck surgeries, and history of anxiety. Treatment of ED typically consists of opioids, propofol, midazolam, and dexmedetomidine. Actions that can be taken to reduce the likelihood of ED can include use of child life specialists, premedication, and preoperative preparation such as virtual reality tours.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">1.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Mason L. Pitfalls of pediatric anesthesia. 2004. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://www2.pedsanesthesia.org/meetings/2004winter/pdfs/mason_Pitfalls.pdf"><span class="RefSource">https://​www2.​pedsanesthesia.​org/​meetings/​2004winter/​pdfs/​mason_​Pitfalls.​pdf</span></a></span>. Accessed December 2021.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">2.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Eckenhoff JE, Kneale DH, Dripps RD. The incidence and etiology of postanesthetic excitement. A clinical survey. Anesthesiology. 1961;22:667–73. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-196109000-00002"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​00000542-196109000-00002</span></a></span>. PMID: 13889092.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-196109000-00002"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=13889092"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">3.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Lee SJ, Sung TY. Emergence agitation: current knowledge and unresolved questions. Korean J Anesthesiol. 2020;73(6):471–85. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4097/kja.20097"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​4097/​kja.​20097</span></a></span>. Epub 2020 Mar 25. PMID: 32209961; PMCID: PMC7714637.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4097/kja.20097"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32209961"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7714637"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">4.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Jooma Z, et al. Emergence delirium in children undergoing dental surgery under general anesthesia. Pediatr Anesthesia. 2020;30(9):1020–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13937"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">5.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Sikich N, Lerman J. Development and psychometric evaluation of the pediatric anesthesia emergence delirium scale. Anesthesiology. 2004;100:1138–45. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-200405000-00015"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​00000542-200405000-00015</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-200405000-00015"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15114210"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">6.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Voepel-Lewis T, Malviya S, Tait AR. A prospective cohort study of emergence agitation in the pediatric postanesthesia care unit. Anesth Analg. 2003;96(6):1625–30. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000062522.21048.61"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1213/​01.​ANE.​0000062522.​21048.​61</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/01.ANE.0000062522.21048.61"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=12760985"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">7.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Foesel T, Reisch HJ. Postoperative behavioural changes in children: comparison between halothane and sevoflurane. Paediatr Anaesth. 2001;11(6):719–23. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1460-9592.2001.00720.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1046/​j.​1460-9592.​2001.​00720.​x</span></a></span>. PMID: 11696150.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1460-9592.2001.00720.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11696150"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">8.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Driscoll JN, Bender BM, Archilla CA, Klim CM, Hossain MJ, Nd GM, Wei JL. Comparing incidence of emergence delirium between sevoflurane and desflurane in children following routine otolaryngology procedures. Minerva Anestesiol. 2017;83(4):383–91. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.23736/S0375-9393.16.11362-8"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​23736/​S0375-9393.​16.​11362-8</span></a></span>. Epub 2016 Nov 30. PMID: 27901329; PMCID: PMC5685164.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.23736/S0375-9393.16.11362-8"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27901329"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">9.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Cohen IT, Finkel JC, Hannallah RS, Hummer KA, Patel KM. Rapid emergence does not explain agitation following sevoflurane anaesthesia in infants and children: a comparison with propofol. Paediatr Anaesth. 2003;13(1):63–7. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1460-9592.2003.00948.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1046/​j.​1460-9592.​2003.​00948.​x</span></a></span>. PMID: 12535042.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1460-9592.2003.00948.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=12535042"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">10.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Kocaturk O, Keles S. Recovery characteristics of total intravenous anesthesia with propofol versus sevoflurane anesthesia: a prospective randomized clinical trial. J Pain Res. 2018;11:1289–95. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/JPR.S164106"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​2147/​JPR.​S164106</span></a></span>. PMID: 30013385; PMCID: PMC6038881.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/JPR.S164106"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30013385"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6038881"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">11.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Chandler JR, Myers D, Mehta D, Whyte E, Groberman MK, Montgomery CJ, Ansermino JM. Emergence delirium in children: a randomized trial to compare total intravenous anesthesia with propofol and remifentanil to inhalational sevoflurane anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth. 2013;23(4):309–15. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.12090"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​12090</span></a></span>. PMID: 23464658.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.12090"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23464658"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">12.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Dahmani S, Stany I, Brasher C, et al. Pharmacological prevention of sevoflurane- and desflurane-related emergence agitation in children: a meta-analysis of published studies. Br J Anaesth. 2010;104(2):216–23.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aep376"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20047899"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">13.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Khan KS, Hayes I, Buggy DJ. Pharmacology of anaesthetic agents I: intravenous anaesthetic agents. Contin Educ Anaesthesia Crit Care Pain. 2014;14(3):100–5. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mkt039"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​bjaceaccp/​mkt039</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mkt039"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">14.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Abu-Shahwan I. Effect of propofol on emergence behavior in children after sevoflurane general anesthesia. Paediatr Anaesth. 2008;18:55–9.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=18095967"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">15.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Weerink MAS, Struys MMRF, Hannivoort LN, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of dexmedetomidine. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2017;56:893–913. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-017-0507-7"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s40262-017-0507-7</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-017-0507-7"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28105598"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5511603"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">16.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Coursin DB, Coursin DB, Maccioli GA. Dexmedetomidine. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2001;7(4):221–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00075198-200108000-00002"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=11571417"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">17.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Shi M, Miao S, Gu T, Wang D, Zhang H, Liu J. Dexmedetomidine for the prevention of emergence delirium and postoperative behavioral changes in pediatric patients with sevoflurane anesthesia: a double-blind, randomized trial. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2019;13:897–905. Published 2019 Mar 15. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S196075"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​2147/​DDDT.​S196075</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2147/DDDT.S196075"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30936683"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6421876"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">18.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Yao Y, Sun Y, Lin J, Chen W, Lin Y, Zheng X. Intranasal dexmedetomidine versus oral midazolam premedication to prevent emergence delirium in children undergoing strabismus surgery: a randomised controlled trial. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2020;37(12):1143–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/EJA.0000000000001270"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​EJA.​0000000000001270​</span></a></span>. PMID: 32976205.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/EJA.0000000000001270"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32976205"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">19.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Tan D, Xia H, Sun S, Wang F. Effect of ancillary drugs on sevoflurane related emergence agitation in children undergoing ophthalmic surgery: a Bayesian network meta-analysis. BMC Anesthesiol. 2019;19(1):138. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-019-0810-y"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12871-019-0810-y</span></a></span>. PMID: 31370793; PMCID: PMC6670177.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-019-0810-y"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31370793"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6670177"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">20.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Song J, Liu S, Fan B, Li G, Sun Q. Perioperative dexmedetomidine reduces emergence agitation without increasing the oculocardiac reflex in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021;100(18):e25717. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000025717"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​MD.​0000000000025717​</span></a></span>. PMID: 33950954; PMCID: PMC8104235.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000025717"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33950954"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">21.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Kim N, Park JH, Lee JS, Choi T, Kim MS. Effects of intravenous fentanyl around the end of surgery on emergence agitation in children: systematic review and meta-analysis. Paediatr Anaesth. 2017;27(9):885–92. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13181"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​13181</span></a></span>. Epub 2017 Jul 4. PMID: 28675609.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13181"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28675609"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">22.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Aouad MT, Kanazi GE, Siddik-Sayyid SM, Gerges FJ, Rizk LB, Baraka AS. Preoperative caudal block prevents emergence agitation in children following sevoflurane anesthesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 2005;49(3):300–4. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-6576.2005.00642.x"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​j.​1399-6576.​2005.​00642.​x</span></a></span>. PMID: 15752392.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-6576.2005.00642.x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=15752392"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">23.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR23">Kim HS, Kim CS, Kim SD, Lee JR. Fascia iliaca compartment block reduces emergence agitation by providing effective analgesic properties in children. J Clin Anesth. 2011;23(2):119–23. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinane.2010.08.007"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​jclinane.​2010.​08.​007</span></a></span>. PMID: 21377075.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinane.2010.08.007"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=21377075"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">24.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR24">Kim J, Byun SH, Kim JW, Kim JY, Kim YJ, Choi N, Lee BS, Yu S, Kim E. Behavioral changes after hospital discharge in preschool children experiencing emergence delirium after general anesthesia: a prospective observational study. Paediatr Anaesth. 2021;31(10):1056–64. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14259"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​14259</span></a></span>. Epub 2021 Aug 6. PMID: 34309126.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14259"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34309126"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">25.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR25">Ryu JH, Oh AY, Yoo HJ, Kim JH, Park JW, Han SH. The effect of an immersive virtual reality tour of the operating theater on emergence delirium in children undergoing general anesthesia: a randomized controlled trial. Paediatr Anaesth. 2019;29(1):98–105. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13535"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​13535</span></a></span>. Epub 2018 Nov 25. PMID: 30365231.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13535"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30365231"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">26.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR26">Adler AC, Nathanson BH, Chandrakantan A. Monochromic light reduces emergence delirium in children undergoing adenotonsillectomy; a double-blind randomized observational study. BMC Anesthesiol. 2021;21(1):217. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-021-01435-1"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1186/​s12871-021-01435-1</span></a></span>. PMID: 34496743; PMCID: PMC8424999.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1186/s12871-021-01435-1"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34496743"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8424999"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">27.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR27">Martin JC, Liley DT, Harvey AS, Kuhlmann L, Sleigh JW, Davidson AJ. Alterations in the functional connectivity of frontal lobe networks preceding emergence delirium in children. Anesthesiology. 2014;121:740–52.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000000376"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=25057840"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">28.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR28">Lee-Archer PF, von Ungern-Sternberg BS, Reade MC, Law KC, Long D. An observational study of hypoactive delirium in the post-anesthesia recovery unit of a pediatric hospital. Paediatr Anaesth. 2021;31(4):429–35. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14122"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​14122</span></a></span>. Epub 2021 Feb 7. PMID: 33405250.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14122"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33405250"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">29.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR29">Traube C, Silver G, Kearney J, et al. Cornell assessment of pediatric delirium: a valid, rapid, observational tool for screening delirium in the PICU*. Crit Care Med. 2014;42(3):656–63. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182a66b76"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​CCM.​0b013e3182a66b76​</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182a66b76"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=24145848"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5527829"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li></ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>