<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Postop Apnea in An Infant After Spinal Anesthesia for Hernia Repair</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-3-031-24396-7_15"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">S. T. Verghese<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Anesthesia STAT!  Acute Pediatric Emergencies in PACU</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_15">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_15</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">Postop Apnea in An Infant After Spinal Anesthesia for Hernia Repair</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Philip dela Merced</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Department of Anesthesia, Pain, and Perioperative Medicine, Children’s National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Philip dela Merced</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:pdelamerce@childrensnational.org">pdelamerce@childrensnational.org</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Apnea</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Prematurity</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Infants</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Spinal anesthesia</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">General anesthesia</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle3" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Educational Objectives</div><div class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par2">At the conclusion of this discussion, the learner will be able to:<div class="OrderedList"><ol><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">1.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par3">Define the problem of apnea of prematurity and its impact in the perioperative period.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">2.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par4">Identify risk factors for apnea, including gestational age, post-conceptual age, and anemia.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">3.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par5">Describe spinal anesthesia in infants and understand its potential complications.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li><li class="ListItem"><div class="ItemNumber">4.</div><div class="ItemContent"><p class="Para" id="Par6">Recognize how spinal anesthesia may impact the risk of postoperative apnea, in comparison to general anesthesia.</p></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></li></ol></div></div></div><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">1 </span>Case Presentation</h2><p class="Para" id="Par7">An 8-week-old male, born at 31 weeks’ gestation, is identified to have an incarcerated left inguinal hernia and is thus brought to the operating room for open left inguinal herniorrhaphy. Other pertinent history includes post-delivery intubation for 1 week, as well as history of a small patent foramen ovale not requiring intervention. There is no history of <span id="ITerm1">intraventricular hemorrhage</span>, necrotizing enterocolitis, bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), or neurologic abnormality after birth. Following the treatment with caffeine and use of nasal CPAP, he was discharged after 3 weeks, with home monitoring on an apnea monitor, which according to parents had not signified any further apneic events at home.</p><p class="Para" id="Par8">On presentation, he weighs 2.9 kg, and his vital signs are stable on room air. After consent is obtained from the parents, the decision is made to provide an awake spinal anesthesia for the surgical procedure. Intravenous line is placed in the saphenous vein on the right leg and D5 LR is administered with the help of an infusion pump. Monitors are placed and the vital signs before the spinal anesthesia and surgery are obtained and recorded on the monitor. After sterile prep and drape, with the infant held in the sitting position by an assistant, spinal space L4–L5 is identified by the anesthesiologist and intrathecal injection of hyperbaric 0.75% bupivacaine dose (1 mg/kg) is performed after easy entry of the spinal needle into the subarachnoid space at the first attempt.</p><p class="Para" id="Par9">The success of the <span id="ITerm2">spinal block</span> is confirmed by the lack of response to sensory stimulus and by the infant’s inability to move the legs. <span id="ITerm3">Bovie pad</span> is placed with infant maintaining a supine with slight head-up position. The surgical prep starts immediately by the surgeon who is already scrubbed and in a sterile surgical gown, ready to make the <span id="ITerm4">surgical incision</span>. The left inguinal herniorrhaphy proceeds without the patient responding to surgical incision or for the remainder of surgical manipulations during the 40-min procedure. No sedation or analgesics are needed intraoperatively, and the patient is transferred to the PACU on a vital sign monitor in stable condition. A complete hand-off is given to the nurse with emphasis to check his blood sugar, keep him warm, and continue monitoring for possible apnea. Although the patient had no intraoperative apneic spells, the possibility of this occurring in the postoperative period is discussed during the hand-off.</p><p class="Para" id="Par10">After 30 min, PACU nurse calls the anesthesiologist that the patient is having apneic spells lasting about 15–20 s each with bradycardia and drop in oxygen saturation to 94–96% which resolves spontaneously on patient stimulation. The postoperative temperature and blood sugar are both reported to be normal in the infant. The apneic periods continue intermittently for another 20 min, and the anesthesiologist decides to treat it with caffeine. Intravenous caffeine 5 mg/kg is administered in PACU in 2 boluses with a 5-min interval (total 10 mg/kg) with increase in heart rate and blood pressure. He appears more awake, crying, and moving more, and he does not have any more apneic spells during the remainder of his PACU stay. The patient is transferred back to the neonatal intensive care unit with stable vital signs and normal temperature and is monitored overnight without any further apnea problems.</p></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2 </span>Discussion</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.1 </span>What Are the Risk Factors for Postop Apnea in Ex-premature Infants Undergoing Anesthesia?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par11">Infants and neonates are at an increased risk of developing complications when they undergo anesthesia. The risk of <span id="ITerm5">perioperative apnea</span>, defined as cessation of breathing for 15–20 s or more, is significantly increased within this patient population [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. <span id="ITerm6">Apnea of prematurity</span> may be defined as less than 20 s often in the presence of desaturation and/or bradycardia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. <span id="ITerm7">Oxygen desaturation</span> may be defined as saturation <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">≤</em>80% for ≥4 s, and bradycardia is often defined as heart rate decrease from baseline by &lt;2/3 for ≥4 s [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. This should be distinguished from periodic breathing, which can be defined as apnea up to 5–10 s, usually during REM sleep, in the absence of either desaturation or bradycardia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. While often a normal finding in a healthy neonate, it typically occurs from ages 2–4 weeks, with spontaneous resolution about 6 months of age. If increased in frequency, it can indicate a precursor to other risk factors, including various other illnesses or physiologic stressors, particularly in premature infants.</p><p class="Para" id="Par12">When considering the <span id="ITerm8">risk factors for</span> apnea of prematurity, premature infants are prone to various physiologic insults, including lower birth weight, anemia, electrolyte imbalances, hypoglycemia, hypothermia, and narrow therapeutic windows for oxygen. Additional consideration is to be given to the immaturity of the central nervous system, with a poorly developed respiratory control center contributing to the risk of apnea. The use of <span id="ITerm9">intraoperative narcotics</span> may also be a contributor to perioperative apnea when compared to older patient populations. Every effort should be taken to maintain a warm temperature for premature babies in the operating room since a decrease in body temperature can cause apnea in premature infants. Low glycogen stores make them prone to hypoglycemia which can also result in apnea, lethargy, irritability, and seizures [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par13">However, age is often seen as the single most important risk factor for apnea, with preterm and ex-premature infants at the highest risk [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par14">A retrospective chart review of ex-premature infants undergoing general anesthesia confirmed the results from previous studies regarding the risk predictors for post-anesthesia apnea in them. Low gestational/post-menstrual age, lower weight, and intraoperative narcotic use were considered the cause of one of the apneic events in this study [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par15">A study on the <span id="ITerm10">incidence of</span> apnea after general anesthesia reported that in ex-premature infants less than 44 weeks of postconceptual age <span id="ITerm11">(PCA)</span>, there is a higher risk for apnea than in ex-premature infants older than 44 weeks PCA. Based on their findings, they concluded that the maximum long-run risk of apnea after anesthesia in ex-premature infants older than 44 weeks postconceptual age is 5% with 95% confidence [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par16">A review of data collected over 12 years described the <span id="ITerm12">epidemiological trends</span> among preterm infants with apnea. Although only 7.5% infants were preterm in this study of over 1.38 million births, the diagnosis of apnea was significantly higher. GE reflux and early gestational age were the two predictors of apnea in these preterm babies [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par17">Multiple studies have set varying criteria for high-risk ages, but current data cite that those infants less than 60 weeks postgestational age are at risk for anesthesia in the postoperative period [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par18">In a landmark study by Coté et al., the investigators analyzed original data from 8 prospective studies from 4 institutions on the risk factors for apnea in 255 infants undergoing inguinal hernia repair under general anesthesia. They excluded infants under spinal or on treatment with caffeine for apnea. The investigators suggested from the combined results of these studies the following:</p><p class="Para" id="Par19">The probability of apnea in nonanemic infants to be free of apnea in PACU <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">is</em> not less than 5% <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">with 95% statistical confidence until the postconceptual age was</em> 48 weeks with a gestational age of 35 weeks<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">.</em> This risk <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">is</em> not less than 1% <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">with 95% statistical confidence for the same subset of infants until postconceptual age was</em> 56 weeks with gestational age 32 weeks <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">or postconceptual age</em> was 54 weeks and gestational age 35 weeks [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>]<em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">.</em></p><p class="Para" id="Par20">The timing of apnea occurrence is important as well when discussing postoperative apnea. <span id="ITerm13">Early apnea</span> is defined as any episode of cessation of breathing within the first 30 min postoperatively, whereas late apnea may occur between 30 min and 12 h postoperatively. Furthermore, data show that early apnea may be a predictor for late apnea [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par21">Additional risk factors may include having a history of apneic events or requiring intervention to maintain ventilation, including administration of caffeine/methylxanthine, oxygen support, or positive pressure ventilation [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par22">Anemia is another cause for increased incidence of apnea in ex-premature infants undergoing general anesthesia.</p><p class="Para" id="Par23">Coté et al., in their study, concluded that apnea was <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">strongly and inversely related to both gestational age and postconceptual age but</em> anemia to be a significant independent risk factor <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">in infants less than 43 weeks’ post conceptual age</em> [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.2 </span>What Is Spinal Anesthesia?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par24"><span id="ITerm14">Neuraxial blockade</span> is a technique commonly used for many pediatric procedures, either as the primary anesthetic or as an adjunct to postoperative pain control. In spinal anesthesia (SA), awake subarachnoid injection of local anesthetic in infants is used as the primary anesthetic for various general abdominal and urologic procedures, particularly those that are open and infraumbilical [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. This technique may be chosen to avoid <span id="ITerm15">general anesthesia (GA)</span>, which will necessitate management of the airway and ventilation of the patient. This may prove useful in the setting of a known or anticipated difficult airway, or patients with a high risk of requiring endotracheal intubation postoperatively. The neonatal population, due to immature lung development and poor respiratory compliance, are often at higher risk of requiring postoperative ventilation following anesthesia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par25">For the procedure, <span id="ITerm16">mild sedation </span>may be provided, either preoperatively or intraoperatively, with agents such as dexmedetomidine or ketamine to preserve spontaneous ventilation, though caution should be taken with preterm neonates as they may be more sensitive even to very low doses of sedation. Other means of pacifying young children, after the spinal is performed, would be external environmental factors, such as the use of visual aids and music, and in a neonate or an infant by providing a small amount of high glucose liquid on a pacifier intermittently. Recent studies have shown that intraoperative sedation is not required; <span id="ITerm17">electroencephalograms</span> performed on infants undergoing spinal demonstrated increased slow wave activity with decreased beta wave activity, indicating that sleep patterns may occur without the use of pharmacologic sedation [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par26">Duration of <span id="ITerm18">neuraxial blockade</span> will vary depending on the local anesthetic used for intrathecal injection. Important factors to focus on are the dose of the local anesthetic, baricity, patient position, and the volume of cerebrospinal fluid.</p><p class="Para" id="Par27">Baricity of the local anesthetic solution used will dictate the spread of local anesthetic in the spinal canal compared to gravity. <span id="ITerm19">Hyperbaric solution</span> will therefore spread down in a descending manner with gravity. When using hyperbaric local anesthetic solution, care must be taken to keep patient in a flat supine or slight head-up position which will allow the anesthetic to spread in caudad direction.</p><div class="Para" id="Par28">Generally accepted practice bases the dose on weight (see Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">1</a></span>). The use of bupivacaine 0.75% in 8.25% dextrose will typically last 60–90 min, depending on if adjuncts such as dexmedetomidine, clonidine, or epinephrine are used. Because of this, discussion should be held with the surgeon to remain immediately available to make the incision, to reduce the risk of block failure due to prolonged surgical time. If a longer case is anticipated, practitioners may opt to perform a caudal catheter afterward to continue the anesthesia once the spinal bupivacaine is no longer effective. Current practice recommendations do not indicate the use of an <span id="ITerm20">intrathecal catheter</span> in these populations, noting the continued unpredictability of spread an increased risk of neurotoxicity and local systemic anesthetic toxicity in infants.<div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 1</span><p class="SimplePara">Suggested dosage protocol for <span id="ITerm21">intrathecal bupivacaine</span> 0.75% in 8.25% dextrose</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Weight, in kg</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Dose (mg/kg)</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Less than 5</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">1</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">5–10</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">0.5</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">10–15</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">0.4</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par29">During the performance of a spinal anesthetic in an ex-premature infant, an intravenous line is first established and 10 ml/kg of D5 LR is given first and all the hemodynamic monitor measurements, i.e., heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation on room air, are observed and recorded as baseline for comparison.</p><p class="Para" id="Par30">Contraindication to <span id="ITerm22">neuraxial anesthesia</span> would be those with anatomic abnormalities (such as tethered cord, myelomeningocele), coagulopathy, and with concern for increased intracranial pressure. Though a relative contraindication, caution should be held for infants with history of <span id="ITerm23">intraventricular hemorrhage</span> in the newborn period and those with implanted devices in connection with the cerebrospinal fluid, such as those with ventricular shunts.</p><p class="Para" id="Par31">Significant amounts of research have also explored the impact of <span id="ITerm24">general anesthesia (GA)</span> on neurocognitive development, with many citing that GA may cause an increase in the incidence of neuroapoptosis and thus worsen neurocognitive outcomes in long term [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>]. However, as part of an international, multicenter, long-term trial, multiple studies have shown that exposure to GA with sevoflurane for under 1 h in early infancy did not alter neurodevelopmental outcomes at either 2 or 5 years of age [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">12</a></span>]. Further data have shown that, in addition to the purported advantages of avoiding airway manipulation and neurodevelopmental outcomes, SA may reduce the risk of moderate hypotension, which may influence cerebral autoregulation and further confer cerebral protection [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec5"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.3 </span>What Are the Complications of Spinal Anesthesia (SA)?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par32">Regional anesthetic techniques, including <span id="ITerm25">SA</span>, can lead to various complications, including neurologic deficits, local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST), infection, cardiovascular collapse, respiratory depression, or postdural puncture headache [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>]. These complications are often exceedingly rare, with studies citing the risk as less than 1% between all regional techniques. In comparison to SA performed in adults, the preganglionic sympathetic blockade, and thus significant hypotension or bradycardia, when a high spinal is obtained is often not seen; this is largely due to the immaturity of the sympathetic nervous system as well as anatomic differences in spinal cord area and physiologic differences in cerebrospinal fluid flow, volume, and pressure [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. It is vital to remember during the procedure that a high spinal may be inadvertently caused by lifting the lower extremities and trunk upward, which may cause any hyperbaric intrathecal local anesthetic to flow by gravity to the cephalad levels. While a very rare complication, this has been shown to cause high spinals and its avoidance is highly recommended.</p><p class="Para" id="Par33">One additional complication of SA would <span id="ITerm26">be</span> failure of the anesthetic to last appropriately long enough till the completion of the procedure and the need for conversion to GA. Failure of SA can be largely due to failure to access the subarachnoid space, obtaining blood instead of CSF on attempted access, or failure of injecting the appropriate amount of local anesthetic into the cerebrospinal fluid [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>]. The success rate of SA varies among providers and centers; however, no current data has shown a relation between failure of SA and specific risk factors, including age, weight, or operator experience.</p><p class="Para" id="Par34">To assist the proceduralist in gaining access to the intrathecal space for a successful SA, mild sedation may be utilized using various agents, such as midazolam or dexmedetomidine. While albeit a small risk, some data have shown that these agents may influence other complications seen, including bradycardia, hypoventilation, or apnea [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">16</a></span>]. However, many providers and centers will opt for this supplemental medication to <span id="ITerm27">further</span> increase the success rate of SA and reduce the conversion to GA.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec6"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.4 </span>Is There a Difference in Risk of Postoperative Apnea Between General Anesthesia and Regional Anesthesia?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par35">The number of preterm newborns surviving neonatal period has increased because of significant improvements in <span id="ITerm28">neonatal intensive care</span>. Because of the renewed interest in spinal anesthesia, many studies have sought to delineate its advantages, if any, over general anesthesia. With regard to postoperative apnea, the overall risk has not been found to be reduced using any regional anesthetic technique in lieu of GA, including the use of SA [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>]. However, it can be noted that the risk of early apnea can be reduced through the use of regional techniques, although no evidence has shown that it mitigates late apnea. Further data show that the level of intervention that may be required to treat the apnea is lower with regional techniques, when compared to GA [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par36">Clinically, this becomes important when considering the intended anesthetic plan for patients undergoing these procedures, as well as the level of observation required postoperatively. Many providers still consider a reduction of early apnea, as well as obviating the need for <span id="ITerm29">oxygen supplementation</span> or invasive airway management, as advantages in comparison to the administration of GA for cases such as herniorrhaphies and other open lower abdominal/urologic procedures. Additional advantages currently being investigated include the use of SA and its ability to improve postoperative analgesia and reduce opiate consumption [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">17</a></span>, <span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR18" role="doc-biblioref">18</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par37">In order to effectively reduce the risk of apnea, in the absence of <span id="ITerm30">physiologic abnormalities</span>, <span id="ITerm31">elective surgeries</span> should be reconsidered and delayed until deemed safer and more feasible, typically once the patient is over 60 weeks postgestational age. Urgent and emergent surgeries should have their risks stratified in accordance with the risks of the intended anesthetic plan.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.5 </span>If Postoperative Apnea Is Identified, What Is the Expected Course?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par38">The importance of identifying <span id="ITerm32">postoperative apnea</span>, even in the absence of clinical intervention, holds significant weight in determining the need for extended observation. Without a significant difference in late apnea between patients receiving regional anesthesia and GA, preterm and ex-premature infants under 60 weeks are still recommended to have 12 h of monitoring postoperatively to ensure no cardiorespiratory compromise, with the highest risk population being those under 45 weeks’ postconceptual age. More importantly, the monitoring should occur with providers who are trained in neonatal airway management and can intervene rapidly if necessary.</p><p class="Para" id="Par39">If <span id="ITerm33">postoperative apnea</span> occurs, supportive care is the recommended treatment plan. This may include oxygen supplementation, even requiring endotracheal intubation if apnea is persistent and life threatening. Data suggest that the prophylactic administration of caffeine may reduce the incidence of postoperative apnea; a meta-analysis of three trials compared administration of caffeine during or immediately after induction of anesthesia and found that use of caffeine was associated with reduction of postoperative apnea and bradycardia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">19</a></span>]. Recent data suggest that caffeine is truly effective in treating apnea of prematurity, citing doses of 10 mg/kg in the postoperative period, to a max loading dose of 20 mg/kg. However, further data is needed to show if this truly improves outcomes intraoperatively and is suggested to be limited to patients with the highest risk factors [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR19" role="doc-biblioref">19</a></span>]. Other data show that SA may have less <span id="ITerm34">clinically </span>significant apnea when compared with GA though this claim should be investigated further [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par40">History of intubation and need for prolonged mechanical ventilation, use of CPAP and the use of caffeine for apnea treatment during the neonatal period, and discharging with an apnea monitor on are significant clinical information to be elicited during preoperative interview of the ex-premature infant’s parents. Frequent apneas indicated by home monitor alarms should be obtained since this indicates serious underlying cause and prediction of its recurrence in the immediate postoperative period.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6 </span>What Are the Risks in This Particular Ex-premature Patient?</h3><section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec9"><h4 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6.1 </span>What Is His Age?</h4><p class="Para" id="Par41">He was born at 31 weeks (gestational age)<span id="ITerm35"/> and now 8 weeks (natal age) which makes him 39 weeks of postgestational age.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec10"><h4 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6.2 </span>Does His Natal Age Add to His Risk of Post-operative Apnea?</h4><p class="Para" id="Par42">He is now 8 weeks of natal age which places him at increased risk for apnea because of the presence of <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">physiologic anemia of the newborn</em> which occurs at this time.</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec11"><h4 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6.3 </span>What Is Physiologic Anemia of the Newborn?</h4><p class="Para" id="Par43"><span id="ITerm36">Physiologic anemia</span> occurs at 8–12 weeks of age due to a decrease in erythropoietin (EPO) levels in the blood. The newborn on emerging from intrauterine hypoxic atmosphere to an independent life outside which is hyperoxic in comparison will produce <span id="ITerm37">less </span>EPO. The switch from fetal hemoglobin to adult hemoglobin also places the infant at risk for this physiologic anemia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR20" role="doc-biblioref">20</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section3 RenderAsSection3" id="Sec12"><h4 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6.4 </span>How Does Caffeine Prevent Apnea of Prematurity?</h4><p class="Para" id="Par44"><span id="ITerm38">Caffeine</span> is the most effective and well-established treatment drug for apnea of prematurity. Its use can decrease the incidence of apnea and intermittent hypoxemia with periodic breathing and allow early wean and extubation success in preterm infants from mechanical ventilation [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">21</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par45">Caffeine stimulates central nervous and cardiovascular systems and increases minute ventilation, metabolic rate, oxygen consumption, catecholamine secretion, skeletal muscle tone, and contractility of the diaphragm. Its specific effect of stimulation of the respiratory center in the medulla and of increasing peripheral chemoreceptor activity terminates apnea and initiates breathing. Therefore, the beneficial effects of caffeine on newborn respiratory efforts <span id="ITerm39">seen</span> from earlier neonatal studies make this a valuable drug to prevent and treat postoperative apnea [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR21" role="doc-biblioref">21</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par46">The pathophysiology of apnea of prematurity is from immaturity of the brain stem respiratory center as well as the central and peripheral chemoreceptor responses. There is diminished neuromuscular control of the upper airway leading to collapse and obstruction. Infants less than 28 weeks of gestation have apnea of prematurity-related symptoms, which decreases to 20% at 34 weeks and less than 10% beyond 34 weeks’ gestation [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR22" role="doc-biblioref">22</a></span>].</p></section>
</section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec13"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3 </span>Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par47">This is a case of an ex-premature infant now 39 weeks of postconceptual age who undergoes a unilateral hernia repair for incarcerated hernia and experiences postoperative apnea in PACU following an uneventful spinal anesthesia. Risk factors identified include age, weight, and anemia. The history of his discharge to go home from NICU included caffeine, and continuous apnea monitor points to the etiology of persistent central apnea from immature control of the brain stem respiratory centers. <span id="ITerm40">Prophylactic caffeine</span> may have helped prevent the postoperative apnea because when administered in PACU it prevented further incidence of apnea. Continuous monitoring and timely intervention helped prevent the problem of persistent apnea and intubation in PACU. The story highlights that postoperative apnea can occur, even if general anesthesia and sedatives are avoided in a 39-week ex-premature infant. Despite a successful spinal with no sedatives, infants less than 44 weeks of postconceptual age, with existing anemia, are prone to postoperative apnea compared to an infant born full term with same natal age of 8 weeks. While this apnea may have occurred with either SA or GA, the lack of airway manipulation in this particular infant prevents the need for further postoperative ventilation and associated airway problems.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">1.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Davis PJ, Cladis F. Smith’s anesthesia for infants and children. 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2017.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">2.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference on Infantile Apnea and Home Monitoring, Sept 29 to Oct 1, 1986. Pediatrics. 1987;79:292–9.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">3.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Zhao J, Gonzalez F, Mu D. Apnea of prematurity: from cause to treatment. Eur J Pediatr. 2011;170(9):1097–105. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-011-1409-6"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s00431-011-1409-6</span></a></span>.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">4.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Davidson AJ, et al. Apnea after awake regional and general anesthesia in infants: the general anesthesia compared to spinal anesthesia study—comparing apnea and neurodevelopmental outcomes, a randomized controlled trial. Anesthesiology. 2015;123(1):38–54.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000000709"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26001033"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">5.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Fanelli D, Kim D, King TS, Weller GE, Dalal PG. Recovery characteristics in neonates following general anesthesia: a retrospective chart review. Cureus. 2021;13(7):e16126.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34367758"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8330508"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">6.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Malviya S, Swartz J, Lerman J. Are all preterm infants younger than 60 weeks post conceptual age at risk for postanesthetic apnea? Anesthesiology. 1993;78:1076–81.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199306000-00009"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=8512100"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">7.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Regenbogen E, Zhang S, Yang J, Shroyer A, Zhu C, DeCristofaro J. Epidemiological trends among preterm infants with apnea. A twelve-year database review. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2018;107:86–92. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2018.01.036"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​j.​ijporl.​2018.​01.​036</span></a></span>. Epub 2018 Jan 31<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2018.01.036"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29501318"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">8.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Cote CJ, Zaslavsky A, Downes JJ, Dean Kurth C, Welborn LG, Warner LO, Malviya SV. Postoperative apnea in former preterm infants after inguinal herniorrhaphy: a combined analysis. Anesthesiology. 1995;82:809–22. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199504000-00002"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1097/​00000542-199504000-00002</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199504000-00002"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=7717551"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">9.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Mammel D, Kemp J. Prematurity, the diagnosis of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and maturation of ventilatory control. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2021;56(11):3533–45. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.25519"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​ppul.​25519</span></a></span>. Epub 2021 Jun 1. PMID: 34042316<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.25519"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34042316"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">10.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Whitaker EE, Chao JY, Holmes GL, Legatt AD, Yozawitz EG, Purdon PL, Shinnar S, Williams RK. Electroencephalographic assessment of infant spinal anesthesia: A pilot prospective observational study. Paediatr Anaesth. 2021;31(11):1179–86. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14294"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​pan.​14294</span></a></span>. Epub 2021 Sep 24. PMID: 34510633; PMCID: PjMC8530954<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14294"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34510633"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8530954"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">11.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Davidson AJ, et al. Neurodevelopmental outcome at 2 years of age after general anaesthesia and awake-regional anaesthesia in infancy (GAS): an international multicentre, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2016;387(10015):239–50.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00608-X"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26507180"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">12.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">McCann ME, de Graaff JC, Dorris L, et al. Neurodevelopmental outcome at 5 years of age after general anaesthesia or awake-regional anesthesia in infancy (GAS): an international, multicentre, randomised, controlled equivalence trial. Lancet. 2019;393:664–77.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32485-1"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30782342"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6500739"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">13.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">McCann ME, et al. Differences in blood pressure in infants after general anesthesia compared to awake regional anesthesia (GAS study-a prospective randomized trial). Anesth Analg. 2017;125(3):837–45.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000001870"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28489641"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5576550"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">14.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Walker BJ, Long JB, Sathyamoorthy M, et al. Complications in pediatric regional anesthesia. Anesthesiology. 2018;129(4):721–32.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000002372"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30074928"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">15.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Frawley G, Bell G, Disma N, et al. Predictors of failure of awake regional anesthesia for neonatal hernia repair. Anesthesiology. 2015;123(1):55–65.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/ALN.0000000000000708"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26001028"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">16.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Bong CL, et al. A pilot study of dexmedetomidine sedation and caudal anesthesia for inguinal hernia repair in infants. Paediatr Anaesth. 2016;26(6):621–7.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.12907"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27061946"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">17.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Chen FK, Li LT, Kelleher CM, Liu CA. Infant spinal anesthesia reduces postoperative pain scores and pain medication consumption in infants undergoing inguinal herniorrhaphy. J Pediatr Surg. 2020;55(12):2840–3.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2020.08.011"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32972743"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">18.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR18">Whitaker EE, Williams RK. Epidural and spinal anesthesia for newborn surgery. Clin Perinatol. 2019;46(4):731–43.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clp.2019.08.007"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=31653305"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">19.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR19">Henderson-Smart DJ, Steer P. Prophylactic caffeine to prevent postoperative apnea following general anesthesia in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2001;4:CD000048.</div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">20.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR20">Widness JA. Pathophysiology of anemia during the neonatal period, including anemia of prematurity. NeoReviews. 2008;9(11):e520. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/neo.9-11-e520"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1542/​neo.​9-11-e520</span></a></span>. PMID: 20463861; PMCID: PMC2867612<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/neo.9-11-e520"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=20463861"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2867612"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">21.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR21">Abdel-Hady H, Nasef N, Shabaan AE, Nour I. Caffeine therapy in preterm infants. World J Clin Pediatr. 2015;4(4):81–93. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.5409/wjcp.v4.i4.81"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​5409/​wjcp.​v4.​i4.​81</span></a></span>. PMID: 26566480; PMCID: PMC4637812<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.5409/wjcp.v4.i4.81"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26566480"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4637812"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">22.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR22">Erickson G, Dobson NR, Hunt CE. Immature control of breathing and apnea of prematurity: the known and unknown. J Perinatol. 2021;41(9):2111–23. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41372-021-01010-z"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41372-021-01010-z</span></a></span>. Epub 2021 Mar 12. PMID: 33712716; PMCID: PMC7952819<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/s41372-021-01010-z"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33712716"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7952819"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li></ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>