<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head><title>Somnolence After V-P Shunt Revision in an Infant</title><meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="content-type"/><link href="../css/springer_epub.css" rel="styleSheet" type="text/css"/></head><body><div epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter"><div class="ChapterContextInformation"><div class="ContextInformation" id="b978-3-031-24396-7_3"><div class="ChapterCopyright">© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023</div><span class="ContextInformationAuthorEditorNames">S. T. Verghese<span class="CollaboratorDesignation"> (ed.)</span></span><span class="ContextInformationBookTitles"><span class="BookTitle">Anesthesia STAT!  Acute Pediatric Emergencies in PACU</span></span><span class="ChapterDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_3">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24396-7_3</a></span></div></div><!--Begin Abstract--><div class="MainTitleSection"><h1 class="ChapterTitle" lang="en">Somnolence After V-P Shunt Revision in an Infant</h1></div><div class="AuthorGroup"><div class="AuthorNames"><span class="Author"><span class="AuthorName">Nina Deutsch</span><sup><a href="#Aff2">1</a> <a aria-label="Contact information for this author" href="#ContactOfAuthor1"><span class="ContactIcon"> </span></a></sup></span></div><div class="Affiliations"><div class="Affiliation" id="Aff2"><span class="AffiliationNumber">(1)</span><div class="AffiliationText">Children’s National Hospital, Washington, DC, USA</div></div><div class="ClearBoth"> </div></div><div class="Contacts"><div class="Contact" id="ContactOfAuthor1"><div class="ContactIcon"> </div><div class="ContactAuthorLine"><span class="AuthorName">Nina Deutsch</span></div><div class="ContactAdditionalLine"><span class="ContactType">Email: </span><a href="mailto:ndeutsch@childrensnational.org">ndeutsch@childrensnational.org</a></div></div></div></div><div class="KeywordGroup" lang="en"><div class="Heading">Keywords</div><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Intraventricular hemorrhage</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Ventriculoperitoneal shunt</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Postanesthetic somnolence</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Electrolyte disturbances</span><span class="Keyword" epub:type="keyword">Anesthesia for premature infants</span></div><!--End Abstract--><div class="Fulltext"><section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec1"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">1 </span>Stem Case</h2><p class="Para" id="Par2">A 13-month-old infant weighing 8 kg with a history of <span id="ITerm1">hydrocephalus</span> is admitted to the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) after a revision of a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt. She was admitted to the hospital the previous day secondary to altered mental status at home. Her mother reports that she vomited several times over the prior 24 h as well. Workup demonstrated that her shunt was no longer functioning properly.</p><p class="Para" id="Par3">Her past medical history is significant for birth at 27 weeks’ gestation via spontaneous vaginal delivery and very low birth weight. She had a grade III intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH) with subsequent <span id="ITerm2">hydrocephalus</span>. She was diagnosed with a patent ductus arteriosus that required surgical closure at 1 month of age. She had bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) for which she was intubated for approximately 4 weeks following birth. She was discharged home on oxygen, NG feeds, and apnea monitor. She also required sildenafil for elevated pulmonary pressures for the first 9 months of life. However, the apnea monitor has been discontinued, and she has had no oxygen requirements for the last 4 months. Her baseline CBC laboratory values demonstrated a hemoglobin of 10 g/dL and hematocrit of 31%.</p><p class="Para" id="Par4">She underwent initial VP shunt placement for her <span id="ITerm3">hydrocephalus</span> at 3 months of age. She has been on NG feeds for 9 months and growing slowly. Her only medication currently is GE reflux medications and albuterol as needed.</p><div class="FormalPara FormalParaRenderingStyle3" id="FPar1"><div class="Heading">Key Questions</div><div class="Para FirstParaInFormalPara" id="Par5"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par6">What is an IVH and how is it graded?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par7">What causes <span id="ITerm4">hydrocephalus</span> following an IVH?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par8">What is the treatment of <span id="ITerm5">hydrocephalus</span>?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par9">What are the anesthetic concerns of an infant with a history of prematurity?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par10">What is the anesthetic management of an infant undergoing VP shunt revision?</p></li></ul></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par11"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Case continued</strong>: Her vital signs on arrival to the PACU are as follows: BP 74/38, HR 120/mt, sat 98%, and temp 36.3 °C.</p><div class="Para" id="Par12">Physical examination demonstrates a somnolent infant. She has a dressing in place on her head, and the fontanelle appears normal. She has poor muscle tone.<div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par13">What are the signs and symptoms of VP shunt malfunction? How likely is it with her current presentation?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par14">Apart from issues with the VP shunt, what are other potential causes of her somnolence?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par15"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Case continued:</strong> In reviewing the anesthetic, you note that the patient had a general anesthetic with an endotracheal tube. Sevoflurane, fentanyl (5 mcg), rocuronium, and acetaminophen have been administered. The rocuronium was reversed with glycopyrrolate and neostigmine and the patient was extubated awake per the anesthesiologist that did the case. She received a total of 80 cc of normal saline during the case and her blood loss was minimal. How does general anesthesia affect formerly premature infants in the recovery period?<div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par16">What would be the most common presentation in the PACU if an excessive amount of opioid was administered to the infant? How would you treat this?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par17">How would her presentation differ if inadequate reversal of the neuromuscular blocking agent was suspected? How would this scenario be treated?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par18"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Case continued:</strong> Further evaluation of the patient reveals that residual anesthetic agents are not the likely cause of the patient’s current presentation.<div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par19">What are the other important diagnoses for somnolence to rule out immediately?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par20">What tests or studies can help in the differential diagnosis?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par21"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Case continued:</strong> On physical exam, the patient responds to pain when stimulated; however, she is still difficult to arouse. She looks more lethargic with poor muscular tone. Her temperature has drifted down to 35.1 despite being swaddled up in blankets. An electrolyte panel and arterial blood gas are sent to the lab. Vital signs remain stable.<div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par22">What findings on an arterial blood gas could result in the patient’s somnolence?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par23">What electrolyte abnormalities could be the cause of her current condition?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par24">If the patient’s electrolyte panel demonstrated hyponatremia, what would be the treatment? How should the treatment be carried out?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par25">What are the concerns with treatment of hyponatremia?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par26"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Case continued:</strong> The laboratory study findings are as follows:<div class="Table" id="Taba"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Test</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Result</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">pH</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">7.34</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">pCO<sub>2</sub></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">53</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">pO<sub>2</sub></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">154</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">BE</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">−2</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Sodium</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">142</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Potassium</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">3.8</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Glucose</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">40</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hemoglobin</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">9.9</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hematocrit</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">30</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par27"><div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par28">What are the implications of her hemoglobin and hematocrit values?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par29">Which finding on the above labs is <em class="EmphasisTypeItalic ">most</em> likely the cause of the somnolence?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par30">What is the treatment of this?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par31">What treatment during the case could have helped to avoid this?</p></li></ul></div></div><div class="Para" id="Par32"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Case continued:</strong> The patient is administered 10% dextrose 2 mL/kg (16 mL) and has improvement in her mental status. She is now awake and crying. Vital signs remain normal. In review of the patient’s preoperative fluids and the anesthetic record, the patient received normal saline without dextrose from the time of her admission.<div class="UnorderedList"><ul class="UnorderedListMarkBullet"><li><p class="Para" id="Par33">What maintenance fluids should she be given now?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par34">If the laboratory values were all within normal limits (i.e., no electrolyte abnormalities), what would be the appropriate next step in the diagnosis and treatment of her somnolence?</p></li><li><p class="Para" id="Par35">At what point should neurosurgery be notified of the patient’s condition?</p></li></ul></div></div></div></section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec2"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2 </span>Discussion</h2><section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec3"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.1 </span>What Is an IVH and How Is It Graded?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par36"><span id="ITerm6">IVH</span> is the leakage of blood into the cerebral ventricular space secondary to vascular fragility of the germinal matrix and changes in cerebral blood flow. Approximately 20% of preterm and very low birth weight (VLBW) newborns will develop an IVH, with more extensive bleeds more likely the smaller and more premature the infant. More than 50% of IVH will occur in the first 24 h after birth, while 90% will occur within the first week of life [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>].</p><div class="Para" id="Par37">Diagnosis is made with the use of cranial ultrasound. The extent of the bleeding will determine the grade of <span id="ITerm7">IVH</span>, as summarized in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab1">1</a></span>.<div class="Table" id="Tab1"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 1</span><p class="SimplePara">Intraventricular grade based on ultrasound findings</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Grade of IVH</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Findings</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">I</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Confined to the subependymal germinal matrix</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">II</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hemorrhage within the lateral ventricle without dilation and/or occupying less than 50% of the ventricle</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">III</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hemorrhage with distention resulting in ventricular dilation and/or hemorrhage occupying more than 50% of the ventricle</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">IV</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Intraventricular hemorrhage that extends into the surrounding parenchyma</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par38"><span id="ITerm8">Clinical presentation</span> of IVH can vary depending on the speed of onset of the bleeding. Acute neurologic deterioration will be seen with significant large, rapidly expanding IVH and is associated with poor outcomes. A slower IVH that evolves over hours to days will present as decreased alertness and activity, hypotonia, abnormal eye movements, and alterations in respiratory effort [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec4"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.2 </span>What Causes <span id="ITerm9">Hydrocephalus</span><span id="ITerm10"/> Following an IVH?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par39">While the mechanism of posthemorrhagic <span id="ITerm11">hydrocephalus</span><span id="ITerm12"/> is not certain, it is thought that blood clots obstruct the flow of cerebrospinal fluid at the cerebral aqueduct or fourth ventricle outlets, resulting in obstructive hydrocephalus [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>]. This is followed by a <span id="ITerm13">delayed communicating hydrocephalus</span><span id="ITerm14"/> secondary to abnormal cerebrospinal fluid absorption [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>]. Ultimately, ventricular dilation can result in hypoxia, ischemia, decreased cerebral perfusion, increased development of free radicals, and destruction of the white matter [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR2" role="doc-biblioref">2</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec5"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.3 </span>What Is the Treatment of <span id="ITerm15">Hydrocephalus</span>?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par40">To prevent long-term sequelae of <span id="ITerm16">hydrocephalus</span>, the definitive treatment is placement of a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt. While this is the definitive treatment, it is typically not performed immediately secondary to the high risk of complications in very low birth weight infants, including skin ulceration, shunt malfunction, and the need for revisions. Often, temporizing measures such as lumbar punctures or external ventricular drains will allow for drainage of fluid and prevent significant dilation until the infant is older [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR1" role="doc-biblioref">1</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec6"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.4 </span>What Are the Anesthetic Concerns of an Infant with a History of Prematurity?</h3><div class="Para" id="Par41">Babies born prior to 37 weeks’ gestation have an increased risk of developing several complications, the severity of which increases with lower gestational age at birth. These include but are not limited to the conditions listed in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab2">2</a></span>.<span id="ITerm17"/><div class="Table" id="Tab2"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 2</span><p class="SimplePara">Complications of <span id="ITerm18">prematurity</span></p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Complications of prematurity</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Anemia of prematurity</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Intraventricular hemorrhage</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Neurologic abnormalities (cerebral palsy)</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par42">Multiple studies have demonstrated an increased risk for adverse events related to anesthesia or sedation for preterm children, children under 3 years of age, and those with significant comorbidities [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR3" role="doc-biblioref">3</a></span>]. Furthermore, infants less than 60 weeks post-gestational age are at higher risk of developing postanesthesia apnea [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec7"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.5 </span>What Is the Anesthetic Management of an Infant Undergoing VP Shunt Revision?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par43">Infants requiring VP shunt <span id="ITerm19">revision</span> typically require a general anesthetic due to the need to potentially access the cranial and abdominal portions of the catheter. Most practitioners will elect to intubate the infant with an endotracheal tube to allow for control of ventilation and protection of the airway while the intra-abdominal portion of the procedure is done.</p><p class="Para" id="Par44"><span id="ITerm20">Revisions</span> of the shunt can occur in the portion in the head, in the tubing between the head and the abdomen, or in the abdomen. If the entire shunt needs to be replaced, the tunneling of the new <span id="ITerm21">catheter</span> is extremely stimulating and may require an opioid. If the patient otherwise meets extubation criteria at the end of the procedure, the infant is extubated to allow for a neurologic exam in the postoperative period.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec8"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.6 </span>What Are the Signs and Symptoms of VP Shunt Malfunction? How Likely Is It with Her Current Presentation?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par45">VP shunt malfunction can <span id="ITerm22">present</span> with an array of signs and symptoms. Bulging fontanelle, fluid collection along the shunt, depressed level of consciousness, irritability, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, and headache were found to be strongly associated with shunt failure [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>]. Other signs of increased intracranial pressure, such as seizures, sunsetting eyes, and papilledema, can also be present. Fever is strongly associated with a shunt infection [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR5" role="doc-biblioref">5</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par46">While this patient does have a common sign of shunt <span id="ITerm23">malfunction</span> (depressed level of consciousness), she does not have a bulging fontanelle or vomiting in this postoperative period. While an issue with the shunt cannot be ruled out, other causes of her current presentation should be investigated as well.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec9"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.7 </span>Apart from Issues with the VP Shunt, What Are Other Potential Causes of Her Somnolence?</h3><div class="Para" id="Par47">The differential diagnosis of delayed awakening following <span id="ITerm24">anesthesia</span> can be divided into four main categories as outlined in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab3">3</a></span> [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR6" role="doc-biblioref">6</a></span>].<div class="Table" id="Tab3"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 3</span><p class="SimplePara">The differential diagnosis of <span id="ITerm25">delayed awakening</span> following anesthesia</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Patient factors</strong></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Surgical and anesthetic factors</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Extremes of age (former premature infant)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Long surgery and anesthetic</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Gender</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Muscle relaxant used</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Genetic variation</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypotension</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Comorbidities (i.e., apnea of prematurity)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypoxia</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Body habitus (i.e., obesity)</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Embolism</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cognitive dysfunction</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Cardiac/neurosurgery</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Seizures</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Regional techniques with sedation</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Stroke</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Painful stimulation</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Drug factors</strong></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara"><strong class="EmphasisTypeBold ">Metabolic factors</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Dosage</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypo-/hyperglycemia</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Time of administration</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypo-/hypernatremia</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Blood-gas solubility</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypothermia</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Metabolism</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hypothyroidism</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Excretion</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Hepatic and/or renal failure</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Drug interactions</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Central anticholinergic syndrome</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Fluid overload</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Acidosis</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Local anesthetic toxicity</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Coagulation defects</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par48">It is imperative to confirm that the most life-threatening conditions, such as hypotension and hypoxia, are not present. Maintenance of the airway, breathing, and circulation are important for initial management. Once these are ruled out, a systematic review of the most common or likely issues should occur to begin appropriate therapy. In this scenario, the patient is maintaining her airway with normal vital signs. Therefore, other factors need to be evaluated promptly.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec10"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.8 </span>What Would Be the Most Common Presentation in the PACU if an Excessive Amount of Opioid Was Administered to the Infant? How Would You Treat This?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par49">With the <span id="ITerm26">administration of opioids</span>, it is imperative to monitor the patient for potentially harmful side effects. Excessive sedation has been shown to predict opioid-related respiratory depression and should be always monitored for while a pediatric patient is receiving opioid therapy [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR7" role="doc-biblioref">7</a></span>]. Opioids also cause constriction of the pupils and can help in the differential diagnosis. Formerly premature infants such as this patient are at particular risk of apnea in the perioperative period [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR4" role="doc-biblioref">4</a></span>]. Other known side effects of opioids include emesis, pruritis, ileus, and chest wall rigidity.</p><p class="Para" id="Par50">If excessive opioids are suspected, naloxone (0.1 mg/kg/dose) should be administered with titration to effect (i.e., reversal of sedation or respiratory depression). Support of the airway and ventilation should also be done to prevent excessive accumulation of carbon dioxide from the resulting hypoventilation that opioids induce. In this case she received 5 mcg of fentanyl at the time of surgical incision but no further opioids after the surgical procedure. Clinically significant dose variation can occur when drug volumes ≤0.5 mL are injected. Pediatric anesthesiologists must be aware of this possible unintended medication error when drawing small volumes of drugs to be administered to smaller patients [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR8" role="doc-biblioref">8</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par51">Although the dose <span id="ITerm27">administered</span> could have been more than intended unless drawn up in a small syringe and precise amount given, she was awakened and extubated fully awake at the end of the surgical procedure and then slowly became somnolent in PACU.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec11"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.9 </span>How Would Her Presentation Differ if Inadequate Reversal of the Neuromuscular Blocking Agent Was Suspected? How Would This Scenario Be Treated?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par52">Inadequate reversal of a <span id="ITerm28">neuromuscular blocking agent</span><span id="ITerm29"/> will present with poor respiratory effort (shallow breathing or weak, rocking breaths), difficulty opening the eyes, and weakness of the extremities. The patient will also be difficult to arouse and not fully responsive to stimulation. Residual paralysis has been shown to increase the risk of passive regurgitation of gastric contents, worsen atelectasis, and interfere with hypoxic ventilatory control [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par53">Train-of-four monitoring (TOF) is the standard to determine the presence of residual neuromuscular blockade. Importantly, a ratio of 0.9 is necessary to ensure the patient can protect their airway following extubation [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>]. Despite this, in a recent survey of pediatric anesthesiologists, a minority of survey respondents always assess TOF, and the use of it was less in those who used sugammadex as their primary reversal agent [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR10" role="doc-biblioref">10</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par54">If prolonged neuromuscular blockade is suspected, a reversal agent should be administered. The cholinesterase inhibitor neostigmine (0.07 mg/kg/dose) can be given with the anticholinesterase glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg). However, it is inappropriate to administer these agents with the expectation of full reversal before at least T2 has been detected on the TOF. Alternatively, sugammadex, an agent that forms a 1:1 inclusion complex around steroidal neuromuscular blocking agent and thereby terminates its action (4–16 mg/kg), can be given despite the presence of a profound block [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR9" role="doc-biblioref">9</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec12"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.10 </span>What Are Other Important <span id="ITerm30">Diagnoses</span> for Somnolence to Rule Out Immediately?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par55">At this point, hemodynamic instability (hypotension, hypoxia, dysrhythmia) and side effects from the anesthetic and residual medications have been ruled out as potential causes of the patient’s somnolence. The patient’s temperature should also be taken to confirm that she does not have hypothermia, which can cause abnormal slowing of her metabolism and drug clearance. Since the patient’s temperature was normal on arrival to PACU, metabolic factors and underlying neurologic causes must now be taken into consideration.</p><p class="Para" id="Par56">Infants are at risk for developing hypothermia during transport and in recovery if warming measures are not taken to prevent it. Complications of perioperative hypothermia include coagulopathy and increased transfusion requirement, surgical site infection, delayed drug metabolism, prolonged recovery, and, in older patients, shivering and thermal discomfort [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR11" role="doc-biblioref">11</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec13"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.11 </span>What Tests or Studies Can Help in the Differential Diagnosis?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par57">Electrolyte abnormalities can be determined with the <span id="ITerm31">use</span> of point-of-care testing for sodium, potassium, and glucose levels. The presence of acidosis (either respiratory or metabolic) should also be investigated with analysis of an <span id="ITerm32">arterial blood gas (ABG)</span>. If these values are within normal limits, more rare but potential conditions such as renal and hepatic failure and hypothyroidism should then be considered.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec14"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.12 </span>What Findings on an <span id="ITerm33">Arterial Blood Gas</span> Could Result in the Patient’s Somnolence?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par58">Significant respiratory depression can result in hypercarbia. In preterm infants, the ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is significantly reduced. However, this improves with advancing age [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR12" role="doc-biblioref">12</a></span>]. Elevations in carbon dioxide can result in somnolence if they are extremely high. Similarly, extreme hypoxia can decrease consciousness and should be evaluated as well.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec15"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.13 </span>What <span id="ITerm34">Electrolyte Abnormalities</span> Could Be the Cause of Her Current Condition?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par59">Abnormal levels of plasma sodium and glucose can cause significant somnolence. This can be determined with point-of-care testing or the analysis of a basic metabolic panel. A heel stick measurement of blood glucose is a rapid and readily available bedside test that can be performed as well.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec16"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.14 </span>If the Patient’s Electrolyte Panel Demonstrated Hyponatremia, What Would Be the Treatment? How Should the Treatment Be Carried Out?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par60">Severe <span id="ITerm35">hyponatremia</span> (less than 120 mEq/L) can result in cerebral edema, altered mental status, or coma [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>]. This can be secondary to severe vomiting, medications such as diuretics, kidney or liver disease, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), or iatrogenic causes, such as excessive administration of hypotonic intravenous fluids [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR14" role="doc-biblioref">14</a></span>]. Once this has been determined, treatment should be undertaken.</p><p class="Para" id="Par61">In patients with severe symptoms such as vomiting, deep somnolence, seizures, coma, or cardiac arrest, 3% saline is administered to correct 4–6 mEq/L within 1–2 h, followed by a slower correction over the subsequent days to normal. Less severe clinical pictures should be corrected by 8 mEq/L/day or slower [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec17"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.15 </span>What Are the Concerns with Treatment of Hyponatremia?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par62">Importantly, if correction of <span id="ITerm36">hyponatremia</span> is too rapid, patients are at risk of central osmotic demyelination in which protein aggregation, DNA fragmentation, and programmed cell death lead to destruction of myelin. Evidence has shown that in patients with hyponatremia for less than 24 h, a more rapid correction is generally well tolerated compared to more chronic (greater than 48 h) hyponatremia [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR13" role="doc-biblioref">13</a></span>].</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec18"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.16 </span>What Are the Implications of Her Hemoglobin and Hematocrit Values?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par63">The patient has a baseline <span id="ITerm37">hemoglobin</span> and <span id="ITerm38">hematocrit</span> that are indicative of anemia and could be a result of her poor feeding habits. The values that are obtained in the postoperative labs do not indicate that there has been significant perioperative bleeding. However, the presence of anemia in premature infants has been shown to be associated with an increased incidence of postoperative apnea compared to premature infants with a normal hematocrit [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR15" role="doc-biblioref">15</a></span>]. This is less likely in this patient considering her age at the time of the procedure.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec19"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.17 </span>Which Finding on the Above Labs Is MOST Likely the Cause of the Somnolence?</h3><div class="Para" id="Par64">Based on the reported laboratory values, the patient appears to have hypoglycemia. Age-based definitions of <span id="ITerm39">hypoglycemia</span> in young children are presented in Table <span class="InternalRef"><a href="#Tab4">4</a></span> [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR16" role="doc-biblioref">16</a></span>].<div class="Table" id="Tab4"><div class="Caption" lang="en"><div class="CaptionContent"><span class="CaptionNumber">Table 4</span><p class="SimplePara"><span id="ITerm40">Age-based definitions</span> of hypoglycemia in young children</p></div></div><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; "><colgroup><col class="tcol1 align-left"/><col class="tcol2 align-left"/></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Age</p></th><th style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Plasma glucose level</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Neonate &lt;48 h old</p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">&lt;47 mg/dL</p></td></tr><tr><td style="border-right: 0.5pt solid ; text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">Neonates >48 h old, infants, and children unable to communicate</p></td><td style="text-align: left;"><p class="SimplePara">&lt;50–70 mg/dL</p></td></tr></tbody></table></div></div><p class="Para" id="Par65">Signs and symptoms of <span id="ITerm41">hypoglycemia</span> include lethargy, change in level of consciousness, hypothermia, seizures, poor feeding, and hypotonia.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec20"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.18 </span>What Is the Treatment of This?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par66">The patient should receive 200 mg of glucose per kg and 2 mL/kg dextrose 10% in water [D<sub>10</sub>W], intravenously.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec21"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.19 </span>What Treatment During the Case Could Have Helped to Avoid This?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par67"><span id="ITerm42">Hyperglycemia</span> can be seen in the perioperative period, prompting many anesthesiologists to infuse non-glucose-containing fluids such as normal saline or lactated Ringer’s solution intraoperatively. However, in this child, there are many risk factors for hypoglycemia. Riegger and colleagues studied the risk factors for intraoperative hypoglycemia in children and determined that these included young age, weight for age less than fifth percentile, ASA status greater than III, having a gastric or jejunal tube, poor feeding, and abdominal surgery [<span class="CitationRef"><a epub:type="biblioref" href="#CR17" role="doc-biblioref">17</a></span>].</p><p class="Para" id="Par68">This patient is an infant with a history of poor feeding and poor weight gain requiring gastric tube feeds. She also had recent vomiting associated with her shunt malfunction. These factors all put her at risk for having low glycogen stores and subsequent hypoglycemia. Therefore, monitoring of blood glucose is recommended either preoperatively with a heel stick glucose level, intraoperatively, or in the recovery room. Infusion of a glucose containing solution for maintenance fluids is indicated when hypoglycemia is likely.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec22"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.20 </span>What <span id="ITerm43">Maintenance Fluids</span> Should She Be Given Now?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par69">Postoperatively, a continuous infusion of glucose (D<sub>10</sub>W at 80–100 mL/kg per day) should be given with routine measurement of plasma glucose levels until the patient is taking fluids by mouth.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec23"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.21 </span>If the Laboratory Values Were All Within Normal Limits (i.e., No Electrolyte Abnormalities), What Would Be the Appropriate Next Step in the <span id="ITerm44">Diagnosis and Treatment</span> of Her Somnolence?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par70">If there were no electrolyte abnormalities found and the ABG was within normal limits, there should be an extremely low threshold to obtain a head CT scan. Considering her recent neurosurgical procedure, she is at increased risk of intracranial hemorrhage, stroke, or air embolus that warrants further evaluation. The possibility of subclinical seizures, potentially seen on an EEG, should also be considered.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec24"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.22 </span>At What Point Should <span id="ITerm45">Neurosurgery</span> Be Notified of the Patient’s Condition?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par71">Considering that this has occurred in the immediate postoperative period, the neurosurgeons should be notified earlier rather than later to discuss concerns related to the surgical procedure. Consultation with a neurologist to help guide further workup and management of the patient’s continued somnolence is important as well.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec25"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.23 </span>Where Should This Patient Be Monitored? And for How Long a Period?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par72">The patient should be monitored overnight at the very minimum. She should be placed on a monitor that has pulse oximetry and EKG capabilities. Depending on the hospital’s monitoring capabilities on the inpatient floor, this can be done either there or in the intensive care unit if necessary.</p></section>
<section class="Section2 RenderAsSection2" id="Sec26"><h3 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">2.24 </span>What Would You Discuss with the Parents and the New Surgeons Who Are Going to Be Managing Her Overnight Stay and Discharge?</h3><p class="Para" id="Par73">Postoperatively, a continuous infusion of glucose (D<sub>10</sub>W at 80–100 mL/kg per day) should be given with routine measurement of plasma glucose levels until the patient is taking fluids by mouth. Regular neurologic checks will be important as well to look for any clinical changes that would point to an issue with the new shunt.</p></section>
</section>
<section class="Section1 RenderAsSection1" id="Sec27"><h2 class="Heading"><span class="HeadingNumber">3 </span>Summary</h2><p class="Para" id="Par74">Ex premature patients with GE reflux who are poor eaters, often seen to have low weight gain, have a high chance of developing hypoglycemia in the perioperative period. The history of vomiting in an infant with failure to thrive clinical scenario should alert the anesthesiologist of the possibility of perioperative hypoglycemia. If a blood glucose level is not done preoperatively, one should be checked intraoperatively, and appropriate therapy should be initiated.</p></section>
<aside aria-labelledby="Bib1Heading" class="Bibliography" id="Bib1"><div epub:type="bibliography" role="doc-bibliography"><div class="Heading" id="Bib1Heading">References</div><ol class="BibliographyWrapper"><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">1.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR1">Sandoval PV, Hernández Rosales P, Quiñones Hernández DG, et al. Intraventricular hemorrhage and posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus in preterm infants: diagnosis, classification, and treatment options. Childs Nerv Syst. 2019;35(6):917–27.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-019-04127-x"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">2.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR2">Strahle J, Garton HJL, Maher CO, Muraszko KM, Keep RF, Xi G. Mechanisms of hydrocephalus after neonatal and adult intraventricular hemorrhage. Transl Stroke Res. 2012;3:25–38.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1007/s12975-012-0182-9"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=23976902"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3750748"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">3.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR3">Havidich JE, Beach M, Dierdorf SF, et al. Preterm versus term children: analysis of sedation/anesthesia adverse events and longitudinal risk. Pediatrics. 2016;137(3):e20150463.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2015-0463"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26917674"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">4.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR4">Coté CJ, Zaslavsky A, Downes JJ, et al. Postoperative apnea in former preterm infants after inguinal herniorrhaphy. A combined analysis. Anesthesiology. 1995;82(4):809–22.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199504000-00002"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=7717551"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">5.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR5">Piatt JH, Garton HJL. Clinical diagnosis of ventriculoperitoneal shunt failure among children with hydrocephalus. Pediatr Emerg Care. 2008;24:201–10.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/PEC.0b013e31816a8d43"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=18431216"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">6.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR6">Misal US, Joshi SA, Shaikh MM. Delayed recovery from anesthesia: a postgraduate educational review. Anesth Essays Res. 2016;10:164–72.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.4103/0259-1162.165506"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=27212741"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4864680"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">7.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR7">Cravero JP, Agarwal R, Berde C, et al. The Society for Pediatric Anesthesia recommendations for the use of opioids in children in the perioperative period. Paediatr Anaesth. 2019;29:547–71.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13639"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=30929307"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6851566"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">8.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR8">Muffly MK, Chen MI, Claure RE, Drover DR, Efron B, Fitch WL, Hammer GB. Small-volume injections: evaluation of volume administration deviation from intended injection volumes. Anesth Analg. 2017;125(4):1192–9. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000001976"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​1213/​ANE.​0000000000001976​</span></a></span>. PMID: 28338490.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000001976"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=28338490"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">9.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR9">Srivastava A, Hunter JM. Reversal of neuromuscular block. Br J Anaesth. 2009;103:115–29.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1093/bja/aep093"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=19468024"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">10.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR10">Faulk DJ, Austin TM, Thomas JJ, et al. A survey of the Society for Pediatric Anesthesia on the use, monitoring, and antagonism of neuromuscular blockade. Anesth Analg. 2021;132:1518–26.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000005386"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33543867"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">11.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR11">Sessler DI. Perioperative thermoregulation and heat balance. Lancet. 2016;387:2655–64.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00981-2"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=26775126"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">12.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR12">Matthew OP. Apnea of prematurity: pathogenesis and management strategies. J Perinatol. 2011;31:302–10.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1038/jp.2010.126"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">13.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR13">Sterns RH. Treatment of severe hyponatremia. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018;13(4):641–9.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.10440917"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=29295830"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePMCID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5968908"><span><span>PubMedCentral</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">14.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR14">Mercier JC, Titomanlio L, Basmaci R, Gaschignard J. Risks of severe hyponatremia in children receiving hypotonic fluids. Arch Pediatr. 2020;27(8):474–9.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcped.2020.08.009"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=33028494"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">15.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR15">Welborn LG, Hannallah RS, Luban NL, Fink R, Ruttimann UE. Anemia and postoperative apnea in former preterm infants. Anesthesiology. 1991;74:1003–6.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1097/00000542-199106000-00006"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=2042754"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">16.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR16">Casertano A, Rossi A, Fecarotta S, et al. An overview of hypoglycemia in children including a comprehensive practical diagnostic flowchart for clinical use. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021;12:684011. <span class="ExternalRef"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.684011"><span class="RefSource">https://​doi.​org/​10.​3389/​fendo.​2021.​684011</span></a></span>.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.684011"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=34408725"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li><li class="Citation" epub:type="biblioentry" role="doc-biblioentry"><div class="CitationNumber">17.</div><div class="CitationContent" id="CR17">Riegger LQ, Leis AM, Golmirzaie KH, Malviya S. Risk factors for intraoperative hypoglycemia in children: a multicenter retrospective cohort study. Anesth Analg. 2021;132:1075–83.<span class="Occurrences"><span class="Occurrence OccurrenceDOI"><a href="https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000004979"><span><span>Crossref</span></span></a></span><span class="Occurrence OccurrencePID"><a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Abstract&amp;list_uids=32639390"><span><span>PubMed</span></span></a></span></span></div></li></ol></div></aside></div></div></body></html>