14    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Give Heparin/ACT/Venous Cannula

The surgeon will order Heparin when he is nearly done isolating the LIMA. After you give the heparin and the ACT is being measured - **reduce the systolic BP to below 100mmHg.**  
  
While this is going on (still waiting for ACT) the surgeon may start to place the venous cannula. Manipulation of the heart may temporarily induce atrial and/or ventricular dysrhythmias.  
  
**Heparin Dose:** 300 U/kg  
300-400 U/kg (3-4mg/kg) = 21ml of 1,000 u/ml of heparin in a 70kg man. Procedures vary among institutions. The perfusionist may specify the dose of heparin.  
  
Check ACT in 1-2 minutes.  
Always give heparin through a central line and always aspirate blood to confirm placement BEFORE administering heparin.  
  
Report that heparin has been given, and ensure that the rest of the team has understood.  
  
ACT must be 450 seconds or greater prior to initiation of bypass. If the result is below 450 seconds, more heparin will be given. The surgeon will specify the additional dose.  

  
Cardiac Anesthesiology Made Ridiculously Simple (accessed 06/2018)  
Art Wallace, M.D., Ph.D.  
https://anesthesia.ucsf.edu/sites/anesthesia.ucsf.edu/files/wysiwyg/pdfs/CardiacAnesthesiaMadeRidiculouslySimple%20.pdf  
  
Perioperative Care in Cardiac Anesthesia and Surgery 2006  
By Davy Cheng and Tirone David  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins  
  
Essentials of Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2018, 2 nd ED. page 116-125  
By Joel Kaplan, Brett Cronin and Timothy Maus  
Elsevier