15    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### When Cannulating, Before Bypass

**Cannulation (arterial then venous)**  
  
Slowly lower systolic BP < 100mmHg.  
  
Use nitroglycerine or potent volatile for this purpose.  
  
Ensure that the patient is completely relaxed. (Inspiratory effort while the atrium is open can result in significant entrainment of air resulting in air embolism.  
  
Observe for preparation for imminent cannulation. The perfusionist will be preparing the arterial cannula go give the surgeon.  
  
The surgeon will cannulate the aorta and connect the arterial tubing. The arterial cannula may be prominently identified to distinguish from the venous.  
  
Following placement of the arterial cannula, the surgeon will cannulate the venous cannula to the right atrium.  
  
The venous cannula is usually advanced into the inferior vena cava and secured in place, sealing the atrial incision.  
  
Following placement of both cannulae, and before cardiopulmonary bypass is initiated, the blood pressure may decrease, and must be corrected. More volume may be given by the perfusionist, but other means of correcting the hypotension are the responsibility of the anesthesia provider(s). Notify the surgeon of what is being done, because all the line clamps must be removed and proper placement of the arterial catheter confirmed. All air must be expelled from the cannula.  
  
Withdraw the PA catheter 2-5 cm within the sterile cathete guard sheath before going on bypass. This decreases the chance of an over-wedging.  
  
**Cardioplegia Cannulation**  
  
The surgeon will next be inserting some other small cannulae for the cardioplegia to eventually arrest the heart. Once these are in place, it will be time to initiate bypass.  

  
Perioperative Care in Cardiac Anesthesia and Surgery 2006, page 205  
By Davy Cheng and Tirone David  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins  
  
Essentials of Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2018, 2 nd ED. page 639-41  
By Joel Kaplan, Brett Cronin and Timothy Maus  
Elsevier  
  
Cardiac Anesthesiology Made Ridiculously Simple (accessed 06/2018)  
Art Wallace, M.D., Ph.D.  
https://anesthesia.ucsf.edu/sites/anesthesia.ucsf.edu/files/wysiwyg/pdfs/CardiacAnesthesiaMadeRidiculouslySimple%20.pdf