2    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### CABG Room Set up for Drugs and Infusions

**Review managing surgeon’s preferences for infusions.**  
  
**Follow institutional policies for dilution, labeling, and administration of all medications.**  
  
**Drugs and Infusions**  
  
**Phenylephrine and Ephedrine syringes** (10ml)  
  
**Fentanyl:** 50 mcg/ml, two 20ml vials  
  
Midazolam 10-20mg  
**Propofol or** Etomidate  
**Pancuronium, double strength vecuronium or sufficient rocuronium to complete the case.  
Cefazolin or appropriate antibiotic** 1-2 grams before and after pump run (2 grams if patient weight is more than 80kg). It is easier to prepare 2 doses in a 20 ml syringe.  
**Vancomycin:** 1gram if allergic to penicillin (start in pre-op). May be the antibiotic of choice for valve procedures.  
**Antibiotics:** administer within 60 minutes of surgical incision Document time of beginning administration.  
  
If renal function is normal, repeat cefazolin or appropriate antibiotic Q3-4h while chest is open.  
**Esmolol:** Ensure that it is available, drawn up if appropriate. For supraventricular tachycardia, bolus 0.5-1mg/kg over 1 minute.  
  
Methylprednisolone 500mg-1g: Only at the surgeon’s request.  
  
**Epinephrine:** Prepare and label dilution (mcg/ml). Have immediately available.  
  
**Calcium Chloride:** Ready or accessible; 100mg/ml in 10ml syringe.  
  
**Magnesium Sulfate,** 2-4 grams in 5 or 10ml syringe, to be given right after aortic clamp to stabilize cell membranes.  
  
**Heparin:** Draw 30-50K units in 60ml syringe.  
(1,000 units/ml ) or (10mg/ml).  
Dose is 300 units/kg (70 kg = 21cc) (80kg=24cc) (90kg=27cc) ensure that additional heparin is available if needed.  
  
Heparin must be given, and results of ACT drawn 3 minutes after heparin administration available, prior to initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass. The ACT determination may be completed at point of care by the perfusionist.  
  
Aminocaproic Acid (Amicar): 10 grams in syringe, give slowly by IV push or infuse over 30 min post induction.  
  
**Amicar Infusion:** Add 10 grams to 250ml bag and infuse at 2G/hr (50ml/hr) after 10G dose is infused. This may be pre-mixed by the pharmacy.  
  
**Protamine:** (10mg/ml) Draw up protamine in 30 ml syringe.  
  
1 mg of protamine will inhibit 1 mg (approximately 100 units) of heparin (it is less confusing to consider heparin doses in units, and not mg, for these calculations.)  
  
Give 10mg of protamine for every 1,000 units of **heparin** given.  
  
For example, a 70kg patient who received 21,000 units (21ml) of heparin will receive 210mg of protamine (21ml) to reverse the heparin effect.  
  
The dose may be determined by the perfusionist. Label the protamine syringe prominently and keep it separate from other drugs to avoid untimely administration, which may be catastrophic.  
**Nitroglycerine and phenylephrine infusion** primed ( -phenylephrine 10mg/250ml 0.9% NaCL = 40 mcg/ml): Connect both to a central line. It is not strictly necessary to use a pump; infusion may be titrated manually. Label the tubing to identify contents of infusion.  
  
**Dobutamine infusion:** primed and on pump, especially if ejection fraction is <40% at conclusion of bypass.  
  
**Dexmedetomidine (Precedex): prepare dilution of 4 mcg/ml.** Using 2 ml vials containing 100 mcg/ml, add one vial to 50 ml of diluent, or 2 vials to 100 ml of diluent. Infusion should be prepared prior to need. This may be connected to a peripheral line. Dose range is 0.2-1 mcg/kg/hr. May begin at 0.4-0.6 mcg/kg/hr either before or after induction.  
  
(For example, an 80-kg patient receiving 0.4 mcg/kg/hr would receive 8 ml/hr. As a reference point, a dose in ml/hr to deliver a dose of 0.4 mcg/kg/hr is 10% of the patient’s weight in kilograms.)  
  
**Sodium Bicarbonate (NaHCO3)** infusion: 3 50 mEq (50 ml) ampules in 1,000 ml diluent; prepared by pharmacy.  
  
Connect to one of the peripheral IVs. Chemically incompatible with most other drugs.  
Bolus 1 ampule (50 mEq) after induction, begin infusion at at 1ml/kg/hr until cardiac recovery.  
  
**Insulin Drip:** studies show that outcomes are better when blood glucose is regulated. Add regular insulin, 100 units, to 100mL of diluent to produce an infusion of 1 unit/ml. Administer according to institutional protocol (goal is to maintain blood glucose at 150 mg/dl.)  
  
Ensure a supply of 3 ml syringes to draw ACT specimens and othe uses.  

  
Cardiac Anesthesiology Made Ridiculously Simple (accessed 06/2018)  
Art Wallace, M.D., Ph.D.  
https://anesthesia.ucsf.edu/sites/anesthesia.ucsf.edu/files/wysiwyg/pdfs/CardiacAnesthesiaMadeRidiculouslySimple%20.pdf  
  
Introduction to the Cardiac Room  
Division of Cardiac Anesthesia, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center  
https://anesthesia.bidmc.harvard.edu/ADEL/documents/cardiac/Intro%20to%20Cardiac.pdf