24    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Surgeon Doing Distal and Proximal Grafts

After the LIMA is harvested and clamped, saphenous grafts from the leg should now be ready.  
  
Distal ends of the saphenous grafts are done first one by one to the diseased coronary arteries on the surface of the heart. The LIMA graft is the last distal end anastomosed to the LAD.  
  
After the last distal anastomosis is completed, the **"HOT SHOT"** of warm substrate-enhanced cardioplegia is delivered.  
  
After Distal Ends are connected:  
Blood is being rewarmed by perfusionist.  
Aortic cross clamp is removed.  
Native coronary vessels are now being reperfused.  
(This is when the reperfusion time officially starts)  
MgSO4 given by anesthesia or perfusionist.  
Side-biting clamp is attached to the ascending aorta-lateral wall.  
Aortic punch makes holes in ascending aorta for proximal grafts (within side-biter clamped area).  
Proximal ends are attached to the new holes on ascending aorta.  
Heart should be beating or quivering.  
Side-biting clamp is removed.  
The new grafts are now being perfused.  
  
After the coronary vessels are re-perfused for at least 8 minutes, bypass can be eventually weaned and separated.  

  
Essentials of Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2018, 2 nd ED. page 631-33  
By Joel Kaplan, Brett Cronin and Timothy Maus  
Elsevier  
  
Cardiac Anesthesiology Made Ridiculously Simple (accessed 06/2018)  
Art Wallace, M.D., Ph.D.  
https://anesthesia.ucsf.edu/sites/anesthesia.ucsf.edu/files/wysiwyg/pdfs/CardiacAnesthesiaMadeRidiculouslySimple%20.pdf