31    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Separation of Bypass

**The patient will not start coming off pump until the following are present:**  
Patient is warm.  
Heart is beating Ventilator back on and lungs re-inflated.  
Monitor back on.  
Inotrope and/or vasoconstrictor drip on.  
  
Now the perfusionists will start to partially occlude (clamp) the venous line. This decreases the amount of blood draining the right heart to the bypass machine thus leaving more in the right heart.  
  
Blood will start filling the right atrium, right ventricle, and pulmonary artery. Waveforms will start to appear on the monitor. The more blood in circulation and in the ejecting heart, the larger the arterial waveform.  
  
As the surgeon tells the perfusionist to drop gradually to 4 liters/min and then to 2 Liters/min and then 1 liter/min the heart will appear increasingly full. With experience, the appearance of the heart can determine need for an inorope.  
  
Sometimes the surgeon will ask the perfusionist to “give me 100cc,” meaning the perfusionist will return an extra 100cc, in effect, a 100cc fluid bolus.  
  
Next, the surgeon will clamp the venous line and remove the venous cannula. Note: the arterial cannula is still in, but there is no flow from the CPB pump. This allows a bolus when needed.  
  
Cardiac output can be rapidly measured at this time (following re-advancement of the PA catheter) and further adjustments made. Fluid volume, inotropes or pressors can be given using the CO and CI.  
  
During the brief time that the arterial cannula remains in place, more volume may be given. If the PA catheter results are not optimal and not responding to the infusions and volume boluses, the venous catheter may have to be re-inserted and bypass re-initiated. If the PA catheter indicates manageable conditions, the surgeon will remove the arterial cannula and that method of volume replenishment will no longer be present. Colloid, either albumin or hetastarch, should be running wide open at this time.  

  
Perioperative Care in Cardiac Anesthesia and Surgery 2006, pages 135-44  
By Davy Cheng and Tirone David  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins