32    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Temporary Epicardial Pacing Wires

While the surgeon is placing the pacing wires, the blood pressure should optimized at around 100mmHg.  
  
Temporary pacemaker leads are routinely placed ON the epicardium right before closing the chest.  
The wires extending from the leads provide quick access to a temporary pacemaker's pulse generator in case something goes wrong in the early post-op period.  
  
The surgeon usually places four wires, attaching one positive and one negative electrode to both the right atrium and the right ventricle. He then loosely sutures the leads onto the epicardium and threads the wires through to the outside of the chest via small, stab-like incisions.  
  
The wires attached to the atrium exit the chest on t one side of the sternum; those attached to the ventricle exit the chest on the opposite side. That way, either the atrium or ventricle or both may be paced as needed. And while the wires attach to the same pulse generator as transvenous pacemakers, there's one crucial difference: The epicardial pacing wires are usually not attached to the pulse generator unless pacemaker therapy is indicated.  
  
They provide atrial and ventricular pacing.  
They are passed from the surgical field to the perfusionist or to whoever has the pacer (pulse generator).  
  
Usually the DDD mode is selected.  
  
**Heart Rate**  
Usually set below the patient’s intrinsic rate. This is for emergency backup.  
  
**Output**  
Up to 20mA of both the atrial and ventricular pacing components-enough to capture.  
  
**Sensitivity**  
Atrial sensitivity of 0.5mV, Ventricular sensitivity of 2.0 mV.  
  
**Pulse Width Duration**  
Usually of short duration of 1ms.  
  
AV Interval: 150 to 200 ms.  
  
Avoid asynchronous modes (VOO).  
  
Biventricular pacing provides a reduced QRS and can improve left ventricular contraction.  
  

  
Temporary epicardial pacing after cardiac surgery: a practical review  
Association of Anaesthetists (accessed June, 2021)  
https://associationofanaesthetists-publications.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2044.2007.04950.x  
  
Temporary epicardial pacing after cardiac surgery: a practical review: part 1: general considerations in the management of epicardial pacing  
Anesthesia.2007 Mar;62(3):264-71.  
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17300304/  
  
Perioperative Care in Cardiac Anesthesia and Surgery 2006, pages 369-373  
By Davy Cheng and Tirone David  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins