35    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Sternal Closure - BP May Drop

By this time, you have your drips/volume infusing to optimize the heart and BP and it’s a matter of titrating. You are preparing for transporting the patient.  
  
Many give a colloid (albumin or hetastarch, 500-1,000 ml). This is usually the time for blood replacement if needed.  
  
As the surgeon closes the chest and tightens the wires, the blood pressure may decrease , particularly if the right heart is dysfunctional and distended. Compression of the heart by the sternum can lead to inadequate preload and hypotension.  
  
If this occurs, increase infusion rate of pressor or inotrope.  
  
You want to limit the the systolic BP may be limited to around 100mmHg. This is to prevent disrupting the new grafts. Tidal volumes delivered by the ventilator should be limited so that the LIMA is not disrupted or damaged by pressure from the expanding lung.  
  
Prepare the patient for transfer to the next level of care. Volume infusion should be continued during this interval. Organize lines and ensure that sufficient slack is present to prevent displacement while transferring the patient.  

  
Perioperative Care in Cardiac Anesthesia and Surgery 2006, pages 369-373  
By Davy Cheng and Tirone David  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins  
  
Cardiac Anesthesiology Made Ridiculously Simple (accessed 06/2018)  
Art Wallace, M.D., Ph.D.  
https://anesthesia.ucsf.edu/sites/anesthesia.ucsf.edu/files/wysiwyg/pdfs/CardiacAnesthesiaMadeRidiculouslySimple%20.pdf