4    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Pre-op- Evaluation / Examination / Consent

Check cardiac history: cath report, thallium, echo and ECG.  
  
Identify the diseased vessels.  
Note the ejection fraction.  
The patient should get all antianginal medications on the day of surgery and following surgery. Withdrawing antianginal drugs must not be done in the perioperative period.  
  
**LABS:** Minimal CBC, platelet count, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose, PT, PTT.  
  
**CXR:** Evaluate for abnormalities, e.g. cardiomegly tumors or pleural effusions.  
  
**ECG:** Check for left bundle branch block. If a pulmonary artery catheter is planned, occasionally patients with a left bundle branch block can develop third degree block with as a consequence of PA catheter placement.  
  
Review cardiac history, noting date of any previous MI and resting ischemia. Note nature of ST changes and leads in which they occur.  
  
A baseline ECG is necessary for comparison; nearly half of patients undergoing CABG experience some degree of ischemia intraoperatively.  
  
**PFT and ABG:** Usually for COPD patients.  
  
**Patient education:** inform the patient about nature and purpose of the arterial line, TEE and PA catheter. Explain post-op ventilation.  
  
**Informed consent and risk disclosure:**  
Patients having cardiac surgery have serious and frequent complications including:  
MI 6%  
CVA 5%  
Mild Neuropsychiatric Effects 90%  
Death 1-3% (Depends on risk)  
Transfusion (40-90%)  
Delirium 8% - 15%  
Atrial Fibrillation Up to 35%  
Renal Failure 1%  
Mediastinitis (Chest Wound Infection) 1-2%  
  
**These risks must be discussed.**  
  
**Note:** Document risk disclosure detailing risks discussed.  

  
Perioperative Care in Cardiac Anesthesia and Surgery 2006, pp. 4-10  
By Davy Cheng and Tirone David  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins