8    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Induction: Doses and Intubation

Ensure that cardiac output, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, pulmonary artery pressure and other pertinent data are recorded prior to induction. Any abnormalities must be corrected to the maximum extent possible and the patient’s condition optimized prior to anesthetic induction. Preoxygenation should take place during this time.  
  
Ensure the availability of all team members, especially the perfusionist. (If the patient arrests on induction, it may be necessary to open the chest and urgently initiate cardiopulmonary bypass.)  
  
**Most frequently used:** 20ml of fentanyl 50 mcg/ml (1 mg) dose with 5mg midazolam. _Observe for chest wall rigidity._  
  
**Precedex Drip** (dexmedetomidine) infusion may begin before induction at 0.4-0.6 mcg/ml.  
  
**10ml syringes of Phenylephrine and Ephedrine should be available.**  
  
**Midazolam:** Most frequent induction dose is 5mg. Another 5mg should be given prior to initiating cardiopulmonary bypass and a further 5mg before rewarming.  
(Low) 0.5 mg/kg  
(Medium) 2 mg/kg  
(High) 3-5 mg/kg  
  
**Fentanyl:** Most frequently used dose is in the range of 10-20ml (0.5–1 mg)  
(Low)1-5 mcg/kg  
(Medium) 20-40 mcg/kg  
(High)100-200 mcg/kg  
  
Often the lower dose fentanyl is used with etomidate or medium to large doses of fentanyl without etomidate.  
  
**Note: doses of fentanyl have been reduced with the increased use of fast track weaning and extubation.**  
  
**Propofol or etomidate (Amidate)**  
  
**Relaxant dose for intubation:**

-   **Pancuronium 10 mg**
-   **Vecuronium 10 mg**
-   **Rocuronium 50 mg**

(Vecuronium may be diluted to double the conventional strength, i.e. 2 mg/ml)  
**Cefazolin (Ancef)** 1-2 grams or Vancomycin in appropriate doses may be given.  
An 8mm ID oral endotracheal tube and a nasogastric or orogastric tube are used.  
  
**Less commonly used opioids and doses:**  
**Sufentanil**  
(High) 20-40 mcg/kg  
(Medium) 10-20 mcg/kg  
(Low) 1-2 mcg/kg  
  
**Remifentanil** 0.2 to 1.0 mcg/kg/min  

  
Cardiac Anesthesiology Made Ridiculously Simple (accessed 06/2018)  
Art Wallace, M.D., Ph.D.  
https://anesthesia.ucsf.edu/sites/anesthesia.ucsf.edu/files/wysiwyg/pdfs/CardiacAnesthesiaMadeRidiculouslySimple%20.pdf  
  
Stoelting’s Pharmacology & Physiology in Anesthetic Practice 6 th Ed., 2022  
Pamela Flood, James P. Rathmell, and Richard D. Urman  
  
Essentials of Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2018, 2 nd ED. page 116-125  
By Joel Kaplan, Brett Cronin and Timothy Maus  
Elsevier