9    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### After Intubation / Trans-esophageal echocardiography (TEE)

Intubate and secure the airway.  
  
Cardiac Anesthesiologist will sometimes perform a TEE.  
  
The TEE will display the heart’s volume status, regional and global ventricular function, and abnormalities that may not already have been diagnosed.  
  
TEEs are not as frequently used for a CABG as for valve replacement.  
  
Use isoflurane (Forane)  
Insert OTG (Orally) orogastic tube (OGT) (unless TEE is planned or bleeding issues are present). There is no need to insert it nasally.  
  
Esophageal temperature probe is unnecessary because the PA catheter measures blood temperature.  
Keep HR <90, BP within 20% of baseline  
Draw blood for labs and ACT: volume needed varies with what instrument is used to measure ACT. The perfusionist will confirm the volume required.  
  
Place the L Bar (or a Mayo stand, depending on the surgeon) over patient's face; this protects the patient.  
Organize work space.  
  
Arrange poles, drapes and clamps as needed.  
  
Administer:  
Methylprednisolone (Solu-Medrol) 500mg-1gram if surgeon specifies this drug.  
Aminocaproic acid (Amicar) 5grams then start infusion.  
Administer antibiotics.  

  
Cardiac Anesthesiology Made Ridiculously Simple (accessed 06/2018)  
Art Wallace, M.D., Ph.D.  
https://anesthesia.ucsf.edu/sites/anesthesia.ucsf.edu/files/wysiwyg/pdfs/CardiacAnesthesiaMadeRidiculouslySimple%20.pdf  
  
Perioperative Care in Cardiac Anesthesia and Surgery 2006  
By Davy Cheng and Tirone David  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins  
  
Essentials of Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Anesthesia for Cardiac Surgery, 2018, 2 nd ED. page 116-125  
By Joel Kaplan, Brett Cronin and Timothy Maus  
Elsevier