D50   body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;} .ui-header .ui-title, .ui-footer .ui-title { margin-right: 0 !important; margin-left: 0 !important; } \* { margin:0px; padding:0px;} .ui-page { background: #f2f2f2 url(bg.jpg); line-height:1.5em;} #home\_link { color:#FFF; text-decoration:none; cursor:pointer; font-family:'AndikaBasicRegular',Arial, sans-serif; font-size:0.9em; margin-left:15%; } #home\_link span {font-size:0.6em;margin-left:15%; color: #D8D8D8; } h1 {font-family:'AndikaBasicRegular'; }

# D50

**D50 (Dextrose 50% in Water)**  
0.5mg/mL in 50mL amp (25 grams).  
**Classification**  
Caloric Agent  
**Anesthesia Indications:**  
We administer D50 for a quick resolution for hypoglycemia.  
**Doses**  
Most anesthesia providers usually keep it simple and administer either 1/2 -1 amp.  
D50 comes in a 25g/50mL preloaded amp.  
1mL of D50 increases BS by 2mg/dL.  
1/2 amp(25mLs) of D50 raises BS by 50mg/dL.  
1 amp (50mLs) of D50 raises BS by 100mg/dL.  
**Possible Doses of D50 for Hypoglycemia**  
(100 - BG) x 0.3 = Number of ml of D50 to push.  
Repeat BS in 20 minutes. If BS is still <60mg/dL,  
use the same dosing formula with the most BS.  
**Adult:** 12.5 - 25 grams D50 slow IV, repeat PRN x 1  
**Pediatric:** 0.5grams/kg D25 slow IV to a maximum of 25 grams. Dilute D50 1:1 with NS and repeat PRN x 1.  
**Action**  
Rapidly increases blood glucose levels.  
Transient osmotic diuretic.  
We usually do not treat for hypoglycemia until the blood sugar (BS) < 60mg/dL.  
The amp is hard to push due to the resistance. Make sure you have a nice IV. Infiltration will burn and cause tissue necrosis.  
**Kinetics**  
**Onset:** < 1 minute.  
**Peak:** Depends on degree of hypoglycemia  
**Duration:** Depends on degree of hypoglycemia.  
**Indications**  
Documented hypoglycemia  
Seizures of unknown etiology  
Cerebral/meningeal edema related to eclampsia  
**pH 3.5-5**  
**Contraindications**  
No significant contraindications in the emergency setting.  
Intracranial hemorrhage  
CVA  
Wernicke's encephalopathy in the alcoholic patient due to probable thiamine deficiency.  
**PRECAUTIONS**  
May cause CNS symptoms in the alcoholic patient.  
Should not be used as a diagnostic agent in the patient with altered LOC unless the BS is known to be < 80 mg/dL or, if the BS cannot be determined, patient is known to be diabetic.  
**Adverse Reactions**  
Pain, phlebitis at injection site  
Hyperglycemia and glycosuria  
Fluid overload  
**ADVERSE REACTIONS/SIDE EFFECTS:**  
May aggravate HTN and CHF.  
May cause tissue necrosis at injection site if infiltration occurs.

#### Copyright © 2012