Direct Xa Inhibitors    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Direct Xa Inhibitors

Factor Xa inhibitors block the activity of clotting factor Xa and prevents blood clots developing or getting worse.  
Factor Xa is generated by both the extrinsic and intrinsic coagulation pathways, it activates prothrombin to thrombin, which activates the final components of the coagulation pathway to form clots.  
  
**Indications:** Maintenance and prophylaxis of VTE and PE.  
Usually orally and do NOT need routinely monitored.  
  
**Direct Xa Inhibitors**  
Apaxiban (Eliquis)  
Rivaroxaban (Xarelto)  
Betrixaban  
Darexaban  
Edoxaban  
Otamixaban  
  
Treatment options for Factor X deficiencies include factor X concentrate, FFP, and prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs).  
  
**Direct Xa Inhibitors** **Monitoring**  
Specific Anti-Xa assay: is most reliable  
Normal antifactor Xa assay: indicates no anticoagulation effect.  
Elevated PT: Drug is present, but no linear correlation  
Normal PT: Minimal drug effect  
Elevated aPTT and INR: Apixaban is present, but no linear correlation  
  
**Antidote:** None**Reversal:** Blood products as needed  
  
**Quick Review**  
**Factor X (** Stuart-Power factor)  
Factor X is vitamin K–dependent and serves as the first enzyme in the common pathway of thrombus formation. When activated, it converts prothrombin to thrombin.  
  
**Activated Factor X (Xa)**  
Factor Xa is a vitamin K-dependent glycoprotein that converts prothrombin to thrombin in the presence of factor Va, calcium and phospholipid during blood clotting.  

Factor Xa Inhibitors  
https://www.drugs.com/drug-class/factor-xa-inhibitors.html  
  
**The role of factor Xa inhibitors in venous thromboembolism treatment  
**Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2015; 11: 117–123  
Katherine P Cabral and Jack E Ansell