Gastroschisis vs. Omphalocele (Exomphalos)   

### Gastroschisis vs Omphalocele (Exomphalos)

<table border="1" cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0"><tbody><tr><td width="197" valign="top"></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Gastroschisis</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Omphalocele</strong></p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Covering Membrane</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>No</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Yes (10% rupture)</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Incidence (Literature varies)</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>2 to 6 in 10,000</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>2 to 2.5 in 10,000</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Maternal Age-years</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Often &lt; 20</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Often &gt; 40</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Location of Defect</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Mostly right of umbilicus</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Usually through the umbilicus. Can be below or above.</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Defect Size (hole)</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>2-5cm</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>2-15cm</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Associated Anomalies %</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>10%</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>50-60%</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Associated Conditions</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Intestinal Atresia<br>Low Birth Weight (77%)<br>Prematurity (55%)<br>GERD<br>Cryptorchidism</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Beckwith Weidmann, Pentalogy of Cantrell Cardiac (9-32%)<br>Trisomy 13,18 or 21<br>Urinary Tract Defects<br>Musculoskeletal<br>Neural tube defects<br>Prematurity (10%)</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Bowel Condition</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Inflamed (may have mucosal or muscularis dysfunction from amniotic fluid exposure)</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Normal</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Proper Bowel Function</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Usually delayed</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Normal GI Function</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Other organs outside of the abdomen</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Usually none-may involve stomach, bladder, uterus, rarely liver.</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Often several organs in the sac outside the belly and associated with other anomalies.</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Surgical Repair</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Primary closure or staged</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Small- Usually primary closure<br>Large- Staged-short or long term Silo or “Paint and Wait”</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Possible Post-op Complications</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Short gut syndrome,</p><p>Malabsorption, Obstruction,<br>Long term TPN,<br>TPN-associated cholestasis, midgut volvulus, Aspiration pneumonia, intestinal atresia/stenosis, Sepsis and NEC<br></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>More frequently with giant defects: NEC, Prolonged Ileus,</p><p>Respiratory Failure<br>Bowel ischemia/necrosis<br>Renal Failure, Peritonitis,<br>Sepsis, Metabolic Acidosis,<br>RDS, Hypothermia, Atelectasis,</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>US Survival Rate</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>83%-97% without short-bowel syndrome complications.</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>No other defects: 90%<br>If other associated anomalies: 60-70%</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Male: Female</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Equal (some literature states Male is slightly &gt; Female.</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Equal</p></td></tr><tr><td width="197" valign="top"><p><strong>Post Birth Management</strong></p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>Cover bowel with</p><p>cellophane (or similar material) to decrease evaporative losses.<br>NICU, IV fluids, NG tube, antibiotics; urgent surgery.</p></td><td width="197" valign="top"><p>May cover sac with silver sulfadiazine cream</p><p>Bowel covered by sac-does not need cellophane. Semi- urgent surgery unless sac ruptures, then treat similar to gastroschisis.</p></td></tr></tbody></table>

Literature varies drastically among the percentages for the statistics above.

**Beckwith-Weidemann Syndrome** results from the abnormal regulation of genes in a particular region of chromosome 11. Many infants with this condition are born with:  
Omphalocele  
Macroglossia (abnormally large tongue)  
Gigantism- an abnormal growth due to an excess of HGH  
Visceromegaly- enlargement of the internal organs  
In 50% of these cases, a pancreatic hyperplasia leads to **hypoglycemia**.  
Polycythemia with hyperviscosity is also common.

**Pentalogy of Cantrell (Thoraco-Abdominal Syndrome)**

**Pentalogy of Cantrell** has five characteristic findings:  
Omphalocele  
Anterior diaphragmatic hernia.  
Sternal cleft (a hole in the sternum)  
Ectopia cordis (the heart is outside the chest)  
Intracardiac defect (either a ventricular septal defect or a diverticulum of the left ventricle)  
_Most infants (around 75%) with Cantrell’s pentalogy die as a result of heart and lung failure and infection._

**Gastroschisis** is a defect in the abdominal wall caused by an infarction of the distal segment of the omphalomesenteric artery or umbilical vein. At the site of infarction—more commonly to the right of the umbilicus—the bowel can herniate through the necrotic wall and enter the extra-embryonic coelom (aka chorionic cavity). Such a malformation develops relatively late in the fetal period, and these infants are usually born prematurely.

**Omphalocele** results from a failure of the gut to migrate into the abdominal cavity at about the 10th week of gestation. Omphalocele is more than twice as likely as gastroschisis to be associated with other congenital anomalies. For example, **Pentalogy of Cantrell**, a syndrome associated with defects in the midline supraumbilical abdominal wall, the lower sternum, and the diaphragmatic pericardium, as well as a deficiency in the anterior diaphragm and cardiac anomalies. **Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome** (omphalocele, macroglossia, gigantism, and hypoglycemia) may also coexist.

Ein SH, Langer JC. Delayed management of giant omphalocele using silver sulfadiazine cream: an 18-year experience. _J Pediatr Surg_. 2012;47(3):494-500.  
Gross RE. A new method for surgical treatment of large omphaloceles. _Surgery._ 1948;24(2):277-92  
Parker SE, Mai CT, Canfield MA, Rickard R, Wang Y, Meyer RE, et al; for the National Birth Defects Prevention Network. Updated national birth prevalence estimates for selected birth defects in the United States, 2004-2006. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2010;88(12):1008-16.  
Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, Roth MP. Omphalocele and gastroschisis and associated malformations. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 May 15;146A(10):1280-5.  
http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/458475\_14 http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefects/features/birthdefects-keyfindings.html http://www.cdph.ca.gov/programs/CBDMP/Documents/MO-CBDMP-Gastroschisis.pdf http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2432124/ http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/AnnualReports/Browsable/DH\_5328840