Sugammadex Dosing in Pediatrics FDA-Approved and Evidence-Based Off-Label    body {font-family: 'Open Sans', sans-serif;}

### Sugammadex Dosing in Pediatrics FDA-Approved and Evidence-Based Off-Label

**  
Chelsea Crews, SRNA, Julie Gallant, SRNA, Ashley Mudd, SRNA  
University of Tennessee Chattanooga, DNP Class of 2024  
Kyle Crawford, DNP, CRNA  
Alfred Vail, DNP, CRNA  
  
Background:  
**Reversal of neuromuscular blockade when using non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents (NDNMBA) is considered a standard of care to reduce the incidence of residual neuromuscular blockade (rNMB) and associated adverse events. Prior to the introduction of sugammadex (Bridion) in the United States in 2015 for adult patients, acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitors, such as neostigmine, were the prevailing reversal agents available for use (Murphy, 2016). Even when appropriately dosed, 60-70% of nicotinic receptors can remain blocked despite reversal with neostigmine, causing rNMB (Nagelhout, 2022). Reversal with AChE inhibitors may result in postoperative weakness from rNMB, leading to suboptimal respiratory mechanisms and even increased risk of postoperative morbidity in the pediatric population (Gaver et al., 2019).   
Sugammadex was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2021 for use in patients 2 to 17 years old. With pediatric patients’ distinct physiology and pharmacology, the most important consideration when selecting reversal agents is rapid, full recovery from neuromuscular blockade to provide safe extubation and limit postoperative complications (Tobias, 2020). Pediatric patients present with an increased sensitivity to steroidal NMBAs and an increased risk of adverse events associated with rNMB. Additionally, there is a decreased ability to monitor train-of-four (TOF) or obtain extubation criteria assessment in this population.  
Like many medications in pediatric clinical practice, sugammadex continues to be used off-label for children under two years of age, as well as for children 2 to 17 years old in emergency reversal doses larger than 4 mg/kg (Meng et al., 2022; Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., 2022; Voss et al., 2022). Clinical sugammadex use has historically been based on evidence, knowledge, and experience from the adult population, although an expanding body of evidence on sugammadex in pediatrics exists to enhance provider knowledge and confidence. Evidence, not label indication, remains the gold standard for clinical decision-making, and providers should always be guided by the most current, highest-quality literature when possible to reduce risk and improve patient outcomes (American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Drugs, 2014). Three distinct themes emerged from the current literature on sugammadex use in pediatric surgical patients, including medication efficacy, adverse effects, and off-label use in children under two with dosing considerations.  
  
**Literature Review:** table.tableizer-table { font-size: 12px; border: 1px solid #CCC; font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif; } .tableizer-table td { padding: 4px; margin: 3px; border: 1px solid #CCC; } .tableizer-table th { background-color: #104E8B; color: #FFF; font-weight: bold; }

| Author | Design and Sample | Major Findings |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Lang et al. (2022) | Systematic review with meta-analysis of 18 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) including 1,065 patients. Databases searched included PubMed, Embase, Cochran Library and China National Knowledge Infrastructure. The GRADE system was used to assess the quality of the discovered evidence. | Demonstrated sugammadex administration allowed for significantly shorter time to TOF >0.9 (p < .00001) compared to traditional cholinesterase inhibitors or placebo, as well as faster extubation (p < .00001). Sugammadex was also associated with significantly lower incidence of PONV (RR = .30), and bradycardia (RR = .09), compared to cholinesterase inhibitors or placebo. |
| Liu et al. (2017) | Systematic review with meta-analysis of 10 RCTs including 580 pediatric participants. The incorporated studies were obtained by searching MEDLINE, EMBASE, CENTRAL, and Google Scholar. The quality of the evidence was assessed using Cochrane Collaboration's risk of bias tool. | Demonstrated sugammadex was significantly more effective than neostigmine or placebo in reducing the time to TOF >0.9 (WMD = −8.51, 95% CI: −11.32 to −5.71). Sugammadex was noted to be well tolerated in most pediatric patients. The incidence of bradycardia was lower in the sugammadex group than in the neostigmine or placebo groups (RR = .08; 95% CI: 0.01 to 0.42). Sugammadex, compared with placebo or neostigmine, did not increase the incidence of other adverse events (PONV) in pediatric patients. |
| Won et al. (2016) | Systematic review with meta-analysis of 6 RCTs including 253 patients aged 2-18 years old. The incorporated studies were obtained by searching MEDLINE, Cochrane Library, Embase, and KoreaMed. The search was not restricted by language or date of publication. The quality of the evidence was assessed using Cochrane Collaboration's risk of bias tool. | Demonstrated significantly shorter time to TOF >0.9 in both 2 mg/kg and 4 mg/kg sugammadex groups (95% CI: −10.77 to −3.54; I2 = 96%; p = .0001) compared to the neostigmine and control groups (95% CI: −29.31 to −5.32; I2 = 98%; p = .005). The extubation time in the sugammadex group was significantly shorter than that in the control group (p = .03). There was no significant difference in the incidence of postanesthetic adverse events between the groups. |
| Korkmaz et al. (2019) | Randomized, double-blind, controlled trial involving 70 patients 5-13 years old receiving adenotonsillectomy. Patients in Group S (n=35) received 2 mg/kg sugammadex and Group N (n=35) received 0.02 mg/kg neostigmine with 0.01 mg/kg atropine. | Showed mean time to extubation was significantly shorter in the sugammadex group compared to the neostigmine group (p < .001) (4.88 ± 0.86 in Group S and 8.83 ± 1.79 minutes in Group N). Agitation scores measured by the PAED scale were significantly lower in the sugammadex group at intervals of 15 minutes and 1 hour following extubation (p < .001). Nausea and vomiting were statistically significantly lower in the sugammadex group, as well as coughing (p < .05). All other complications including hypoxemia, bronchospasm, laryngospasm, and apnea were higher in the neostigmine group, but not statistically significant. |
| Franz et al. (2019) | Retrospective case series of 287 patients under age 2, of which 53 were neonates. All patients that received either sugammadex or neostigmine between October 2016 and October 2018 were included in the study. Data was obtained by utilizing integrative tools from the anesthesia information management system. | A total of 331 doses of sugammadex were received by patients, including 2 mg/kg (n = 223), 4 mg/kg (n = 98), and 16 mg/kg (n = 10). No adverse effects were reported and no significant difference for end of surgery and out of OR times between sugammadex and neostigmine groups. Last dose of NMBA and reversal agent significantly shorter for sugammadex versus neostigmine (p < .001). |
| Gaver et al. (2019) | Quantitative retrospective case-control study involving 968 patients that received sugammadex and 968 that received neostigmine between birth and 19 years of age | Bradycardia was observed more commonly in neostigmine patients than in sugammadex patients (15.5% vs. 7.3%; p < .001). The incidence of other adverse events including hypotension, bronchospasm, anaphylaxis, or vomiting, was not found to be different. The maximum observed incidence of anaphylaxis was 0.1% between both groups, less than what has been found in adults. The mean out of OR time was significantly shorter in the sugammadex group by an average of 2.81-11.94 minutes (p < .001). |
| Ammar et al. (2017) | Quantitative- Double blind, RCT involving 60 pediatric patients aged 2-10 years scheduled for lower abdominal surgeries. Group S (30 patients) received 4mg/kg of sugammadex and Group N (30 patients) received 0.35 mg/kg neostigmine and 0.02 mg/kg atropine. | Pediatric patients that received sugammadex had significantly shorter recovery to TOF > 0.9 (2.5 ± 0.8 vs. 12.6 ± 4.3; p < .05) and extubation times (2.0 ± 0.8 vs. 4.3 ± 1.9 min; p < .05) compared to those receiving neostigmine and atropine. Statistically significant reduction in occurrences of PONV (p < .05) and tachycardia (p < .05) were observed with sugammadex. A single dose of sugammadex 4 mg/kg was not sufficient to reverse neuromuscular blockade to TOF > 0.9 in one patient. |
| Duran et al. (2022) | Retrospective observational study involving 54 patients (30 male, 24 female) aged 0-18 years that underwent a d rigid bronchoscopy between 2013 and 2018. 23 of the patients received neostigmine and 31 received sugammadex. | In pediatric patients, aged 0-18 years, undergoing rigid bronchoscopy, patients receiving sugammadex demonstrated a significantly faster recovery than patients receiving neostigmine (10 ± 2 vs. 16.4 ± 4.2 min; p < .001). Recovery was measured as time from the end of procedure to admission to PACU. Complications including bronchospasm, laryngospasm, and hypoxia were higher in the neostigmine group, but no statistical significance was present. |
| Kara et al. (2014) | Quantitative- Double blind, RCT involving 80 patients aged 2-12 years scheduled for outpatient surgery. Group RN (n=40) received 0.03 mg/kg neostigmine and Group RS (n=40) received 2 mg/kg of sugammadex for reversal of rocuronium. | Shorter time to TOF > 0.90 (0.46 ± 0.70 vs. 1.97 ± 2.14 min; p < .05) and shorter extubation times (1.15 ± 1.44 vs. 3.25 ± 1.79 min; p < .001) were observed with sugammadex compared to neostigmine and atropine. No adverse events were reported in either group. No significant effect on heart rate was found with sugammadex, but a statistically significant increase in heart rate was observed in patients that received neostigmine and atropine. |
| Li et al. (2021) | Quantitative- RCT involving 60 patients aged 1-6 years that underwent cardiac surgery. For reversal, Group S (n=30) received 4 mg/kg sugammadex and Group N received 30 mcg/kg neostigmine and 15 mcg/kg atropine. | In 60 pediatric cardiac surgery patients, the recovery time to a TOF > 0.9 (3.4 ± 1.2 vs. 76.2 ± 20.5 min; p < .01) and extubation time (31.0 ± 6.4 min vs. 125.2 ± 21.6 min; p < .01) were significantly shorter in sugammadex group than neostigmine group. The incidence of postoperative atelectasis was less with sugammadex versus neostigmine (0 vs. 20%; p = .024). There was a statistically significant decrease in heart rate and mean arterial pressure in both groups (p < .05), but there was no significant difference between the groups. The incidence of PONV was increased with neostigmine, but there was not a statistically significant difference (3 vs. 1; p = .612). |

**Review our full evidence table here:** [https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VeSSaw9lgEBaZ8GJ7hioXjKF9gpT6QRnqyQ-HNihCZ4/edit](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VeSSaw9lgEBaZ8GJ7hioXjKF9gpT6QRnqyQ-HNihCZ4/edit)**  
Clinical Recommendations:  
**Sugammadex is SUPERIOR to neostigmine in efficacy for pediatric patients 2-17 years old. Consider sugammadex whenever possible to support faster extubations and shorter recovery times. Monitor for the most common adverse events, but understand incidence is low and sugammadex is safe in children.  
  
Bradycardia - Sugammadex may provide better HR stability than traditional agents; Awareness of the risk of bradycardia, but treatment is likely not required.  
  
Hypersensitivity - It may be difficult to recognize or distinguish from other anesthetic complications; Critical 5-minute window warrants heightened monitoring and awareness but overall, minimal concern.  
  
Emergence delirium - Prolonged recovery due to rNMB increases risk of agitation development; Sugammadex may help decrease ED.  
  
Consider off-label use for children <2 years old with an understanding that larger doses are not shown to be harmful when striving for adequate and complete reversal.  
  
Larger and emergent reversal doses > 4mg/kg (up to 16 mg/kg) in CICV scenarios are off-label but bradycardia and other adverse effects are not shown to be a concern.  
Approved Dosing:  
Patients 2-17 years old: TOF of 2/4 twitches administer 2 mg/kg and TOF of 0/4 twitches or 1-2 post-tetanic twitches administer 4 mg/kg.  
There is a lack of adverse events associated with larger, off-label dosing, making “excessive or overdosing” safe for patients in situations requiring rapid and complete reversal in emergencies.  
Use in patients younger than 2 years old provides a rapid and safe reversal of neuromuscular blockade. Safety and efficacy are not limited to full-term, healthy infants and children under 2, but have also been demonstrated in higher-risk preterm infants and children under 2 with significant comorbidities and neonates.**  
  
Literature Review Results (a more detailed summary):  
  
Efficacy  
**Consistent with the literature and clinical experience in adults, sugammadex provides a faster, more reliable recovery from neuromuscular blockade than neostigmine and glycopyrrolate or atropine in pediatric patients of all ages, with a multitude of studies reporting sugammadex attained a TOFr > 0.9 significantly faster than neostigmine (Ammar et al., 2017; El Sayed & Hasan, 2022; Ghoneim & Beltagy, 2015; Kara et al., 2014; Lang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021; Mogahed et al., 2017; Ozgun et al., 2014; Won et al., 2016). Large systematic reviews from Lang et al. (2022), Liu et al. (2017), and Won et al. (2016) concluded that recovery time to TOF > 0.9 was achieved 6-15 minutes faster, on average, with sugammadex than neostigmine. Patients receiving sugammadex also experience fewer postoperative pulmonary complications including atelectasis, respiratory depression, or recurarization requiring intervention (Ammar et al., 2017; Li et al., 2021). Duran et al. (2022), Korkmaz et al. (2019), and Nada (2017) observed decreased incidence of hypoxia, laryngospasm, bronchospasm, and apnea with sugammadex. These findings were not statistically significant, but still noteworthy as avoidance of any postoperative complication is of the utmost priority.  
  
**Adverse effects  
**Adverse reactions that have been examined for the safety of sugammadex in pediatric anesthesia include perioperative hemodynamic alterations, postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), and emergence agitation (EA). Despite suspicions of increased adverse effects with sugammadex use compared to traditional AChE inhibitors, strong evidence was found that sugammadex does not contribute to increased side effects or hemodynamic instability compared to traditional reversal practices (Arends et al., 2020; Gaver et al., 2019; Martin et al., 2016; Mogahed et al., 2017; Ozgun et al., 2014; Saber et al., 2021; Sari et al., 2013; Turk et al., 2019; Xiaobing et al. 2020).  
Rare cases of marked bradycardia, sometimes resulting in cardiac arrest, have been observed with sugammadex administration in the adult population (Merck & Co., 2022). This adverse event can be more deleterious and feared in the pediatric population due to reliance on heart rate (HR) for cardiac output as children are unable to compensate with increased contractility or augmented stroke volume (Alsuhebani et al., 2020; Elisha et al., 2022). There was no observed bradycardia as a primary or secondary outcome in a volume of studies (Ammar et al., 2017; Arends et al., 2020; Duran et al., 2022; El Sayed & Hassan, 2016; Franz et al., 2019; Saber et al., 2021; Kara et al., 2014). In studies that have compared sugammadex to the traditional approach for reversing neuromuscular blockade, evidence supports that there is either no significant difference between the two approaches (Li et al., 2021, Saber et al., 2021) or sugammadex is associated with lower rates of bradycardia (Gaver et al., 2021; Lang et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2017). Sugammadex may provide better heart rate stability and less incidence of bradycardia than traditional reversal agents. Providers should be aware of the risk of bradycardia with sugammadex, but given this data, treatment is likely not required. However, prudent practitioners recognize and are prepared for the increased risk of bradycardia in the pediatric patient population. It can be reasonably inferred that the greatest risk for bradycardia from sugammadex is within the immediate period following medication administration, most often within 5 minutes.  
Potentially serious hypersensitivity and anaphylaxis was another recognized adverse event associated with sugammadex administration, occurring in 0.3% of healthy adult volunteers (Merck & Co., 2022). Anaphylaxis risk was the reason initial approval for the medication was delayed by the FDA (Elisha et al., 2022; Murphy, 2016). However, the incidence of anaphylaxis and hypersensitivity in pediatric patients is comparable to that of neostigmine and not greater than what has been observed in adults (Gaver et al., 2019; Ruetzler et al., 2022). Tsur and Kalansky (2014) identified 4 cases of hypersensitivity and anaphylaxis that were confirmed to result from sugammadex administration. The average time to onset of the reaction was 1 minute and 52 seconds with all reactions occurring within 4 minutes of receiving the sugammadex dose (Tsur & Kalansky, 2014). This suggests that there may be critical 5-minute window that warrants heightened monitoring and awareness for hypersensitivity reaction, particularly in patients at increased risk for anaphylaxis.  
**  
Dosing  
**The FDA’s report on sugammadex in 2021 left two major off-label uses without official approval: doses greater than 4 mg/kg and administration to patients less than two years of age. The approved regimens were for patients two to <17 years: two out of four twitches with a TOF administer 2 mg/kg and zero out of four twitches with a TOF or one to two post-tetanic twitches administer 4 mg/kg (Yost, 2021). Even though there was an unclear consensus regarding the need for higher dosing in the reversal of deep blockade and repeat dosing considerations, there was significant evidence of no increased risk of adverse effects with higher dosages. A lack of adverse events associated with larger dosing would make “excessive dosing” or “overdosing” safe for patients, allowing anesthesia providers to ensure rapid, complete reversal in emergencies with more liberal dosages. A common side effect concerned with sugammadex and dosages greater than the standard 2-4 mg/kg dose is bradycardia (Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., 2022).  
In one study, initial sugammadex dosages ranged from 2-15.7 mg/kg and the dose was not associated with bradycardia onset (Alsuhebani et al., 2020). Another prospective cohort study demonstrated that the sugammadex dose (0.5-7.76 mg/kg) did not influence bradycardia incidence ( _p_ \= .243) (Arends et al., 2020). Additionally, Matsui et al. (2019), Simonini et al. (2019), and Voss et al. (2022) all found no statistically significant increase in adverse events with increased doses of sugammadex. Cardenas and Gonzalez (2013), Langley et al. (2016), and Wakimoto et al. (2018) observed doses up to 16 mg/kg to be effective and safe in infants and neonates. Of note, the risk of sugammadex overdose is low, as an accidental overdose of 40 mg/kg and human tolerance studies of up to 96 mg/kg have been administered without any serious adverse events reported (Standford Medicine, 2022). The independence of dosing from adverse events, the safety of high doses, and relatively low risk of serious adverse events from overdose is important when considering off-label use in pediatric patients under 2 years of age.   
Consistent with the findings in the broader pediatric population, the use of sugammadex in pediatric patients younger than two years of age provides a rapid and safe reversal of neuromuscular blockade. Recovery occurs within two minutes of medication administration (Alonso et al., 2014; Langley et al., 2016; Ozmete et al., 2016; Sari et al., 2013; Turk et al., 2019). Furthermore, the safety and efficacy of sugammadex is not limited to full-term, healthy infants and children under 2, but has also been demonstrated in higher-risk preterm infants and children under 2 with significant comorbidities (Cardenas & Gonzalez, 2013; Martin et al., 2016; Rubin & Ramamurthi, 2017; Saber et al., 2021; Wakimoto et al., 2018).  

**References:  
**Alonso, A., de Boer, H. D., & Booji, L. (2014). Reversal of rocuronium-induced neuromuscular block by sugammadex in neonates. _European Journal of Anaesthesiology_ , _31_ , 163. https://tinyurl.com/387dwrwy  
Alsuhebani, M., Sims, T., Hansen, J. K., Hakim, M., Walia, H., Miller, R., Tumin, D., & Tobias, J. D. (2020). Heart rate changes following the administration of sugammadex in children: A prospective, observational study. _Journal of Anesthesia_ , _34_ , 238–242. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00540-019-02729-y  
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Drugs. (2014). Off-label use of drugs in children. _Pediatrics_ , _133_ (3), 563–567. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-4060  
Ammar, A. S., Mahmoud, K. M., & Kasemy, Z. A. (2017). A comparison of sugammadex and neostigmine for reversal of rocuronium‐induced neuromuscular blockade in children. _Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica_ , _61_ (4), 374–380. https://doi.org/10.1111/aas.12868  
Arends, J., Hubbard, R., Shafy, S. Z., Hakim, M., Kim, S. S., Tumin, D., & Tobias, J. D. (2020). Heart rate changes following the administration of sugammadex to infants and children with comorbid cardiac, cardiovascular, and congenital heart diseases. _Cardiology Research_ , _11_ (5), 274–279. https://doi.org/10.14740/cr1045  
Cardenas, V. H., & Gonzalez, F. D. (2013). Sugammadex in the neonatal patient. _Columbian Journal of Anesthesiology_ , _41_ (2), 171–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcae.2013.02.003  
Duran, M., Tepe, M., Magac, M. S., Apaydin, H. O., Dogukan, M., & Demirci, C. (2022). Comparison of the effects of sugammadex and neostigmine on recovery of anesthesia in rigid bronchoscopy in pediatric cases. _Health Sciences Journal of Adiyaman University_ , _8_ (2), 136–141. https://doi.org/10.30569/adiyamansaglik.997055  
El Sayed, M., & Hassan, S. (2016). Does sugammadex facilitate recovery after outpatient tonsillectomy in children? _Egyptian Journal of Anesthesia_ , _32_ (4), 447–450. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egja.2016.08.021  
Franz, A. M., Chiem, J., Martin, L. D., Rampersad, S., Phillips, J., & Grigg, E. B. (2019). Case series of 331 cases of sugammadex compared to neostigmine in patients under 2 years of age. _Pediatric Anesthesia_ , _29_ (6), 591–596. https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13643  
Gaver, R. S., Brenn, B. R., Gartley, A., & Donahue, B. S. (2019). Retrospective analysis of the safety and efficacy of sugammadex versus neostigmine for the reversal of neuromuscular blockade in children. _Anesthesia & Analgesia_ , _129_ (4), 1124–1129. https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000004207  
Ghoneim, A. A., & El Beltagy, M. A. (2015). Comparative study between sugammadex and neostigmine in neurosurgical anesthesia in pediatric patients. _Saudi Journal of Anaesthesia_ , _9_ (3), 247–252. https://doi.org/10.4103/1658-354X.154696Kara, T., Ozbagriacik, O., Turk, H. S., Isil, C. T., Gokuc, O., Unsal, O., Seyhan, E., & Oba, S. (2014). Sugammadex versus neostigmine in pediatric patients: A prospective randomized study. _Revista Brasileira de Anestesiologia_ , _64_ (6), 400–405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjan.2014.03.001  
Korkmaz, M. O., Sayhan, H., & Guven, M. (2019). Does sugammadex decrease the severity of agitation and complications in pediatric patients undergoing adenotonsillectomy? _Saudi Medical Journal_ , _40_ (9), 907–913. https://doi.org/10.15537/smj.2019.9.24485  
Lang, B., Zeng, L., Zhang, Q., Chen, S., Huang, L., Jia, Z., Yu, Q., & Zhang, L. (2022). Efficacy and safety of sugammadex for neuromuscular blockade reversal in pediatric patients: An updated meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials with trial sequential analysis. _BMC Pediatrics_ , _22_ , Article 295. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-022-03288-0  
Langley, R. J., McFadzean, J., & McCormack, J. (2016). The presumed central nervous system effects of rocuronium in a neonate and its reversal with sugammadex. _Paediatric Anaesthesia_ , _26_ (1), 109–111. https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.12789  
Li, L., Jiang, Y., & Zhang, W. (2021). Sugammadex for fast-track surgery in children undergoing cardiac surgery: A randomized controlled study. _Journal of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Anesthesia_ , _35_ (5), 1388–1392. https://doi.org/10.1053/j.jvca.2020.08.069  
Martin, D. P., Crawford, J., Uffman, J., Michler, R., & Tobias, J. D. (2016). Sugammadex and fast-track anesthesia for pediatric cardiac surgery in a developing country. _Anaesthesia, Pain, & Intensive Care_ , _20_ , 17–22. https://tinyurl.com/yeyt5jan  
Matsui, M., Konishi, J., Suzuki, T., Sekijima, C., Miyazawa, N., & Yamamoto, S. (2019). Reversibility of rocuronium-induced deep neuromuscular block with sugammadex in infants and children—A randomized study. _J-Stage_ , _42_ (10), 1637–1640. https://doi.org/10.1248/bpb.b19-00044  
Meng, M., Zhou, Q., Lei, W., Tian, M., Wang, P., Liu, Y., Sun, Y., Chen, Y., & Li, Q. (2022). Recommendations on Off-Label Drug Use in Pediatric Guidelines. _Frontiers in pharmacology_ , _13_ , 892574. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.892574Merck & Co. (2022). _Bridion (sugammadex) injection prescribing information_ . https://tinyurl.com/45nekfc6  
Mogahed, M. M., Mohamed, R. M., & Hamed, J. M. (2017). Sugammadex efficacy for rapid reversal of rocuronium induced neuromuscular blockade in pediatric rigid bronchoscopy regardless the depth of anesthesia. _Journal of Anesthesia and Clinical Research_ , _8_ (10), 769–773. https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-6148.1000769  
Murphy, G. The development and regulatory history of sugammadex in the United States. (2016). _The Official Journal of the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation, 30_ (3), 53-54.Nada, E. N. (2017). Efficacy of sugammadex compared with neostigmine for reversal of rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade and deep extubation in outpatient surgeries for asthmatic pediatric patients. _Research and Opinion in Anesthesia & Intensive Care_ , _4_ (3), 143–148. https://doi.org/10.4103/roaic.roaic\_112\_16  
Nagelhout, J. (2022). Neuromuscular blocking agents, reversal agents, and their monitoring. In S. Elisha, J. S. Heiner, & J. J. Nagelhout (Eds.), _Nurse anesthesia_ (7th ed., pp. 151–176). Elsevier.Özgün, Ç., Çakan, T., Baltaci, B., & Basar, H. (2014). Comparison of reversal and adverse effects of sugammadex and combination of anticholinergic-anticholinesterase agents in pediatric patients. _Journal of Research in Medical Sciences_ , _19_ (8), 1–11. https://tinyurl.com/rf9dd598  
Ozmete, O., Bali, C., Cok, O. Y., Turk, H. E., Ozyilkan, N. B., Civi, S., & Aribogan, A. (2016). Sugammadex given for rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade in infants: A retrospective study. _Journal of Clinical Anesthesia_ , _35_ , 497–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinane.2016.08.040  
Rubin, J. E., & Ramamurthi, R. J. (2017). The role of sugammadex in symptomatic transient neonatal myasthenia gravis: A case report. _A & A Case Reports_ , _9_ (9), 271–273. https://doi.org/10.1213/XAA.0000000000000590  
Ruetzler, K., Li, K., Chhabada, S., Maheshwari, K., Chahar, P., Khanna, S., Schmidt, M. T., Yang, D., Turan, A., & Sessler, D. I. (2022). Sugammadex versus neostigmine for reversal of residual neuromuscular blocks after surgery: A retrospective cohort  
analysis of postoperative side effects. _Anesthesia & Analgesia_ , _134_ (5), 1043–1053. https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000005842  
Saber, H., Mousa, S. A., AbouRezk, A. R., & Zaglool, A. (2021). Recovery profile of sugammadex versus neostigmine in pediatric patients undergoing cardiac catheterization: A randomized double-blind study. _Anesthesia, Essays and Researches_ , _15_ (3), 272–278. https://doi.org/10.4103/aer.aer\_139\_21  
Sari, S., Tasdemir, B., Sözkısacık, S., & Gürsoy, F. (2013). Side effects of sugammadex use in pediatric patients. _Journal of Clinical and Experimental Investigations_ , _4_ (3), 265–268. https://doi.org/10.5799/ahinjs.01.2013.03.0281  
Simonini, A., Brogi, E., Calevo, M. G., & Carron, M. (2019). Sugammadex for reversal of neuromuscular blockade in paediatric patients: A two-year single-centre retrospective study. _Anaesthesia Critical Care & Pain Medicine_ , _38_ (5), 529–531. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accpm.2019.02.010  
Standford Medicine. (2022). _Sugammadex_ https://ether.stanford.edu/policies/sugammadex.htmlTobias, J. D. (2017). Current evidence for the use of sugammadex in children. _Pediatric Anesthesia_ , _27_ (2), 118–125. https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13050  
Tsur, A., & Kalansky, A. (2014). Hypersensitivity associated with sugammadex administration: A systematic review. _Anaesthesia_ , _69_ (11), 1251–1257. https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.12736  
Turk, H. S., Kilinc, L., Sayin, P., & Oba, S. (2019). Retrospective study of the restoration of neuromuscular blockage with sugammadex in newborns who used rocuronium. _Southern Clinics of Istanbul Eurasia_ , _30_ (2), 163–166. https://doi.org/10.14744/scie.2019.05025  
Voss, T., Wang, A., DeAngelis, M., Speek, M., Saldien, V., Hammer, G. B., Wrishko, R., & Herring, W. J. (2022). Sugammadex for reversal of neuromuscular blockade in pediatric patients: Results from a phase IV randomized study. _Pediatric Anesthesia_ , _32_ (3), 436–445. https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.14370  
Wakimoto, M., Burrier, C., & Tobias, J. D. (2018). Sugammadex for rapid intraoperative reversal of neuromuscular blockade in a neonate. _Journal of Medical Cases_ , _9_ (12), 400–402. https://doi.org/10.14740/jmc3213  
Won, Y. J., Lim, B. G., Lee, D. K., Kim, H., Kong, M. H., & Lee, I. O. (2016). Sugammadex for reversal of rocuronium-induced neuromuscular blockade in pediatric patients. _Medicine_ , _95_ (34), Article e4678. https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000004678  
Xiaobing, L., Yan, J., Wangping, Z., Rufang, Z., Jia, L., & Rong, W. (2020). Effects of sugammadex on postoperative respiratory management in children with congenital heart disease: A randomized controlled study. _Biomedicine & Pharmacotherapy_ , _127_ , e110180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.2020.110180Yost, S. (2021). _Clinical review_ . U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https://www.fda.gov/media/152066/download